Title: In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=uxzgGLWPj2

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

Matthew Faw 1 Rajat Sen 2 Yichen Zhou 2 Abhimanyu Das 2

Abstract 

Motivated by the recent success of time-series foundation models for zero-shot forecasting, we present a methodology for in-context fine-tuning 

of a time-series foundation model. In particu-lar, we design a pretrained foundation model that can be prompted (at inference time) with multiple time-series examples, in order to forecast a target time-series into the future. Our foundation model is specifically trained to utilize examples from multiple related time-series in its context window (in addition to the history of the target time-series) to help it adapt to the specific distribution of the target domain at inference time. We show that such a foundation model that uses in-context ex-amples at inference time can obtain much better performance on popular forecasting benchmarks compared to supervised deep learning methods, statistical models, and other time series founda-tion models. Interestingly, our in-context fine-tuning approach even matches the performance of a foundation model that is explicitly fine-tuned on the target domain. 

1. Introduction 

Time-series data is ubiquitous in several domains such as retail, finance, manufacturing, healthcare, and the natural sciences. In many of these domains, time-series forecasting, i.e., predicting time-series into the future, is a critical prob-lem – for example, in applications like retail forecasting, cli-mate and weather predictions, and traffic forecasting. In the last decade, deep learning approaches (Salinas et al., 2020; Oreshkin et al., 2020; Sen et al., 2019) have become popular in forecasting, often outperforming statistical approaches like ARIMA (Box & Jenkins, 1968). However, until re-cently, deep learning approaches for forecasting have ad-      

> 1Georgia Institute of Technology. Part of this work was done while the author was a Student Researcher and Visiting Researcher at Google Research. 2Google Research. Correspondence to: Matthew Faw <mfaw3@gatech.edu >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

hered to the traditional supervised machine learning frame-work of having to train a forecasting model on task-specific training data, before being able to perform forecasting for that task. On the other hand, in Natural Language Process-ing (NLP), Large Language Models (LLMs) (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) have shown the promise of foun-dation models: a single pretrained model can perform well and adapt to tasks like translation, code generation during inference time in a zero-shot or few-shot manner. Motivated by the success in NLP, there has been significant work in recent years on time-series foundation models for forecasting, ranging from re-purposing LLMs directly for forecasting (Gruver et al., 2023) to fine-tuning pretrained LLMs on time-series data (Zhou et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2023) to pretraining time-series foundation models from scratch (Das et al., 2024; Goswami et al., 2024; Woo et al., 2024; Ansari et al., 2024; Garza & Mergenthaler-Canseco, 2023). The last approach, in particular, has been shown to obtain strong zero-shot accuracy, rivaling the best super-vised models trained specifically for the target datasets. Several of these papers (Zhou et al., 2023; Ansari et al., 2024; Goswami et al., 2024) have shown an opportunity for further accuracy improvement by fine-tuning of their pretrained models on target datasets. However, this breaks the zero-shot paradigm that precisely makes these time-series foundation models so appealing to practitioners who do not want to build training pipelines. This raises a natural question: Can we recover the benefits of fine-tuning a time-series foundation model by providing examples from a target dataset at inference time? 

At the same time, the first generation of time-series foun-dation models lack some of the desirable features of LLMs with respect to in-context learning : the zero-shot perfor-mance of an LLM can be greatly improved at inference time by using its context window for prompting techniques such as few-shot (Brown et al., 2020), chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022b) or instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2022a). These papers have shown emergent in-context learning abilities for LLMs. In particular, if we prompt them with related exam-ples and demonstrations then ask a specialized question, the model is able to reason similarly for the question at hand. In this work, we study a methodology to enable similar in-context ability for time-series foundation models i.e. being 1In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

able to prompt the model with time-series examples from the target domain, and recover the benefits of domain-specific fine-tuning. We refer to this as in-context fine-tuning .1

We train a foundation model that lets us forecast a time-series by providing in its context window not just the his-torical values of the time-series, but also examples from other related time-series that could help the model adapt, at inference time , to the distribution of the target time-series. For example, consider a highway traffic prediction system that stores hourly data from the last week, in order to predict the future hourly traffic for a particular highway. Consider a time-series foundation model that has not seen data in pretraining that captures the temporal patterns in this traffic data. Then, simply prompting the model with the previous week’s traffic time-series for that highway might not be enough to obtain accurate zero-shot performance. However, adding to the prompt historical traffic data from other high-ways and weeks, might help the model better adapt to the traffic data distribution. The main contributions of our paper are as follows: 

(i) We introduce the study of in-context fine-tuning for time-series foundation models, and propose the use of prompts that not only include the usual history of the target time-series for forecasting, but also include related time-series examples in-context. We propose a methodology for training such a model by starting from a base time-series foundation model and con-tinue pretraining it with in-context examples. Our training is decoder-only (Liu et al., 2018) and can adapt to varying his-tory and horizon lengths (up to a certain maximum history) and to a varying number of related time-series examples in the context window (again up to a certain maximum number of examples). The resulting model can then learn to borrow patterns from these related examples to perform better on the target forecasting task. 

(ii) We empirically evaluate the benefits of in-context fine-tuning using our foundation model, and show that in-context fine-tuning can lead to better zero-shot performance on pop-ular forecasting benchmarks as compared to supervised deep learning methods, statistical models as well as other foun-dation models. In particular, on a well known forecasting benchmark, comprised of 23 datasets not included in the pretaining of our foundation models, we show that our in- 

> 1Terminology: In the LLM domain, this notion is also called “few-shot learning” (Brown et al., 2020), “few-shot prompting” (Ye & Durrett, 2022), or “in-context tuning” (Chen et al., 2022). Also, borrowing from LLM literature, we will refer to the generic abil-ity of pretrained foundation models to learn from information in their context window at inference time as “in-context learning”. Additionally, we will refer to pretrained models that do not need gradient-updates via explicit training or tuning for an unseen target dataset as “zero-shot”.
> Figure 1. Analogous to few-shot prompting of a foundation LLM (left), we train a time-series foundation model to support few-shot prompting with an arbitrary number of related in-context time-series examples (right). The dashed box encloses the full context window/prompt.

context fine-tuned model is 6.8% better than the base model we start from, while also being 5% better than the next best baseline. More importantly, (and perhaps surprisingly), it 

achieves similar performance to that obtained by explicitly fine-tuning the base model on the training split of every dataset in the benchmark. 

2. Related Work 

As mentioned previously, there has been a spurt of re-cent work on time-series foundation models for forecasting. These approaches can be broadly divided into three cate-gories. (i) Prompting LLMs like GPT-4 to directly predict the future of a numerical series encoded as text. This was investigated in LLMTime (Gruver et al., 2023); despite the initial promise subsequent works have shown that such approaches can be lacking in accuracy (Woo et al., 2024; Das et al., 2024). (ii) Fine-tuning pretrained LLMs like GPT2 on time-series data with adapter layers (Zhou et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2023). These approaches have mostly been shown to work well in the dataset-to-dataset transfer learning setting (rather than in the zero-shot setting), and they are also disadvantaged from having to use excessively large models due to their LLM backbones. (iii) Pretraining transformer based models from scratch on huge volumes of time-series data, which seems to be the most promising ap-proach towards times-series foundation models (Das et al., 2024; Garza & Mergenthaler-Canseco, 2023; Ansari et al., 2024; Woo et al., 2024; Goswami et al., 2024). Indeed, some of these models have shown superior zero-shot accu-racy when compared to supervised deep forecasters even on datasets that are outside of their pretraining set. Some of the above papers, e.g., (Ansari et al., 2024; Goswami et al., 2024), have additionally shown that their pretrained models’ performance can be further improved by fine-tuning the model on examples from the target dataset. While this supervised fine-tuning results in improved per-task accuracy, this practice breaks the zero-shot paradigm in terms of requiring extra training on the target dataset. In the NLP domain, a defining property of a foundation 2In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

LLM is its ability to be further adapted to domain-specific tasks through either fine-tuning or prompting. In particular, LLMs have been shown to perform in-context learning on a variety of downstream NLP tasks by prompting them with a natural language instruction (Radford et al., 2019) and a few demonstrations or examples of the task. This phenomenon is also referred to as few-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020). Subsequent works (Min et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2022) have proposed fine-tuning a pretrained LLM to obtain better performance on few-shot learning prompts. Other papers (Min et al., 2022b; Wei et al., 2023) have empirically investigated how few-shot learning works in LLMs. More recently, Shi et al. (2024) explored a similar idea for in-context pretraining, where they pretrain an LLM on sequences of related documents. This in-context learning ability is widely recognized as being associated with the stacked transformers used in the LLMs, and their theoretical properties are studied in a more precise sense (Garg et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2024) for simpler function classes such as linear regression. Despite the commonality between time-series foundation models and LLMs, it is not obvious how (or even if) the phe-nomenon of few-shot learning for NLP tasks carry over to the time-series setting. There is no clear definition of few-shot learning in terms of a time-series foundation model. In fact, prior pretrained time-series foundation mod-els like (Ansari et al., 2024; Das et al., 2024; Garza & Mergenthaler-Canseco, 2023) do not provide a clear way for prompting with anything other than the past values of a time-series in the context window. The MOIRAI model (Woo et al., 2024) supports the functionality of any-variate fore-casting, which allows the model to take as input arbitrary number of variates (up to a certain maximum). While one could provide in-context examples as additional variates, their approach is mostly aimed at multi-variate datasets. Nevertheless, we also compare with this model in Table 1. 

3. Problem Definition 

Time-series foundation models aim to build a general pur-pose forecaster that can take in a past history of a target forecasting task, y1: L = {y1, y 2, · · · yL}, where we look back L time-steps and map them to a forecast byL+1: L+H ,for a horizon length of H. The aim is to have byL+1: L+H as close as possible to the unseen future yL+1: L+H according to some well defined error metric. Such a model can be thought of as a function, 

g : y1: L → byL+1: L+H (1) which is capable for handling different values of L and H.In this work, we aim to further enhance the abilities of such models by enriching their context. In addition to the target task’s history y1: L, we add up to n − 1 in-context       

> Figure 2. An example prediction task. The three black dashed lines (separators) separate the three in-context examples {y(i)1: Ti}i∈[3]
> and the history y1: L. The goal is to predict the horizon yL+1: L+H
> of the history y1: L.

examples of the form {y(1) 1: T1 , y(2) 1: T2 , · · · y(n−1) 1: Tn−1 } that can represent the past time-points of other related time-series (with possibly varying lengths T1, · · · , T n−1). In the case of our motivating example of highway traffic prediction, 

y1: L is a week of hourly traffic data on that highway, and 

{y(1) 1: T1 , y(2) 1: T2 , · · · y(n−1) 1: Tn−1 } are traffic data on n − 1 nearby highways. We plot an example prediction task with three in-context examples in Figure 2. Therefore, the enhanced forecasting problem is aimed at training a model f ,

f :



y(1) 1: T1 , y(2) 1: T2 , · · · y(n−1) 1: Tn−1 , y1: L



→ byL+1: L+H . (2) As before, our time-series foundation model should be able to handle different values of L and H. Additionally it should be able to support any number of in-context ex-amples ( n − 1) ranging from zero to a maximum value. With some abuse of notation, let us index the target task’s forecasting history and horizon as the n-th example i.e. 

y(n)1: Tn := y1: L+H , where Tn = L + H. Therefore, our decoder-only model will work with n examples of the form 

{y(1) 1: T1 , y(2) 1: T2 , · · · , y(n)1: Tn } which are drawn from related time-series. Henceforth, we will refer to {y(i)1: Ti }ni=1 as the 

context (synonymous with prompt) supplied to the model. 

4. Model Architecture 

Motivated by the strong zero-shot performance achieved by stacked transformer models in decoder-only mode for time-series forecasting, we propose to adapt a base TimesFM model (Das et al., 2024) to leverage the additional infor-mation available via in-context examples. In particular, we first pretrain TimesFM in its original fashion to obtain a base checkpoint TimesFM (base) . We then modify the model architecture and continue pretraining from TimesFM (base) using training data with in-context examples (we call 3In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models  

> Figure 3. TimesFM-ICF employs the decoder-only architecture for time-series prediction with in-context examples.

this phase continued pretraining ) to obtain a new pretrained foundation model TimesFM-ICF .Adapting their model architecture to make use of the in-context examples is somewhat delicate, and requires modifi-cations to the original model. A depiction of our proposed model architecture is given in Figure 3. As in their model, our model partitions each example into non-overlapping input patches , and uses a shared input residual block (a one-hidden layer perceptron with skip connection, see Das et al. (2023)), to embed each patch as a token before feeding the tokens into the stacked transformers in a decoder-only fashion. The output embeddings are mapped to the next output patches via another shared output residual block. To teach the model to use the new in-context examples, we adapt the original TimesFM architecture to better handle (1) the in-context example separators, (2) the cross-example attention, and (3) the positional encoding (by applying no positional encoding when pretraining TimesFM (base), see Appendix A.3). Despite these changes, we are still able to leverage the TimesFM (base) checkpoint, which was pretrained for forecasting given just the history of the target time-series. We describe the key details of our architecture design below. 

4.1. Separators for In-Context Examples 

Our context window contains in-context examples from different time-series. Hence the model needs to be able to separate these, since na ¨ıve concatenation can confuse the model. Consider the example in Figure 4. If we na ¨ıvely concatenate multiple in-context examples (e.g., linear trends, Figure 4a) together, then the combination of these trends may appear to the model as an entirely different time-series (e.g., a triangle wave, Figure 4b). Therefore, we choose to insert a common learnable separator token after each in-context example. We visually depict these separators as the dashed lines in Figure 4a. When feeding examples to the decoder, we sequentially pass each tokenized patch of each time-series example to the model, followed by the separator token at the end of an example; depicted in Figure 3.   

> (a) Multiple linear trends. (b) A triangular wave.
> Figure 4. Concatenating in-context examples together without sep-arators can confuse the model: multiple linear trends look like a triangular wave if concatenated na¨ ıvely.

4.2. Cross-Example Attention 

In order to allow our model to distinguish between different in-context examples, we allow the transformer to attend (causally) to all previous patches including the separator to-kens. Note that, if the model did not attend to the separator tokens, then we could never hope to distinguish between the two scenarios from Figure 4a and Figure 4b. By attending to the previous separator tokens, the model can potentially distinguish how many in-context examples have been pro-4In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

cessed so far. Although at the input to the stacked transformer we use a common separator token to separate the examples, the out-put tokens corresponding to the positions of these separator tokens can play a much more nuanced role as we proceed through the subsequent transformer layers. As the output tokens corresponding to these separator tokens causally at-tend to all previous tokens, after several transformer layers these tokens can, for instance, potentially summarize the information in all the patches corresponding to their exam-ple and/or convey the separation boundaries of the different in-context examples to the model. 

4.3. Overall Model 

Since our model builds upon the TimesFM architecture (Das et al., 2024), we introduce a similar notation style for ease of exposition. The model processes in-context examples in the following fashion. Starting with an example input 

{y(1) 1: T1 , . . . , y(n)1: Tn }, each example y(i)1: Ti is partitioned into input patches of length p:

˜y(i) 

> j

= y(i) 

> p(j−1)+1: pj

∀j ∈ [⌈Ti/p⌉] and i ∈ [n].

As in (Das et al., 2024), our model takes an additional padding mask m(i)1: Ti to ensure that it makes good predic-tions on time-series which are not a multiple of the patch length p. Analogously to the partitioning of the example inputs, we partition the padding masks as: 

˜m(i) 

> j

= m(i) 

> p(j−1)+1: pj

∀j ∈ [⌈Ti/p⌉] and i ∈ [n].

Given these patches and masks, we feed each patch ˜y(i)

> j

through a common MLP embedding layer to obtain tokens: 

t(i) 

> j

= InputResidualLayer (˜ y(i) 

> j

⊙ (1 − ˜m(i) 

> j

)) .

We will slightly abuse notation by denoting the separator token σ as t(i) 

> ⌈Ti/p⌉+1

= σ, and let the mask for the separator token ˜m(i) 

> ⌈Ti/p⌉+1

= 0 (i.e., the separator tokens are never masked). Write Ji = ⌈Ti/p⌉ + 1 , the total number of patches belonging to the example y(i)1: Ti .After tokenizing the input patches, we feed the tokens, to-gether with a learnable separator token σ, autoregressively to the stacked transformer layers in decoder-only mode. We take ˙m(i) 

> j

to be the last entry of ˜m(i) 

> j2

, and denote the sequence of token/mask pairs corresponding to example i as 

˜t(i)1: j = (( t(i)1 , ˙m(i)1 ), . . . , (t(i) 

> j

, ˙m(i) 

> j

)) ∀j ∈ [Ji].

> 2

Intuitively, ˙m(i) 

> j

indicates whether or not patch ˜y(i) 

> j

is masked from the right. We attend only to patches which are not padded from the right, and have at least one unpadded values (see Ap-pendix A.2) 

Then, the output of the stacked transformer layer for token 

t(i) 

> j

can be described as: 

o(i) 

> j

= StackedTransformer (˜ t(1) 1: J1 , . . . , ˜t(i−1) 1: Ji−1 , ˜t(i)1: j ).

We emphasize the output o(i) 

> j

for token t(i) 

> j

defined above depends on (i) all previous (unmasked) tokens t(i′) 

> j′

, i′ < i 

and j′ ∈ [⌈Ti′/p⌉], (ii) the i−1 separator tokens t(i′) 

> ⌈Ti′/p⌉+1

=

σ for i′ < i , and (iii) the tokens ˜t(i)1: j for the current example. Finally, we feed the outputs o(i) 

> j

for each example i with patch j from the stacked transformer through a residual block to obtain the predicted time-series: 

by(i) 

> pj +1: pj +h

= OutputResidualLayer (o(i) 

> j

).

This corresponds to the model’s prediction of the next h

steps (output patch length) of y(i)

> pj +1: pj +h

.We use the same loss function as original TimesFM model. 

5. Continued Pretraining Data 

As mentioned before, we start with TimesFM (base) which was pretrained on a diverse corpus of about 400B time-points (see Table 3 in Appendix A.2 and Das et al. (2024) for more details on the datasets). We then continue pretrain-ing it on training data containing in-context examples. 

5.1. Context Generation 

We convert individual datasets to generate contexts with in-context examples that the model sees during the contin-ued pretraining. Recall that the original TimesFM model is trained up to a maximum history length of Lmax = 512 .During the training of TimesFM (base) a time-series of length T = Lmax + h is loaded for back propagation where 

h = 128 is the output patch length. Therefore, we choose 

T as the maximum length of our n in-context examples. For any time-series in a particular dataset, we use win-dowing with a shift of 1 to generate examples of length 

T i.e. for a time-series y1: M the possibles examples are 

{y1: T , y2: T +1 , · · · yM −T +1: M }. For time-series that are less than T in length, we generate padded examples as de-tailed in Appendix A.2. Now these examples are packed in groups of n to form the context. We consider two kinds of grouping: 

Times-series level: For a long time-series, we can split the original time-series into shorter time-series examples, each of length T , then select n of those shorter examples to form the context {y(i)1: T }ni=1 for the original time-series. 

Dataset level: For each dataset, we can group any n seg-ments of length T from any of the time-series in that dataset, 5In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

to form a context. For instance, a set of n segments from any of the time-series from the Electricity dataset could be grouped to form a context {y(i)1: T }ni=1 .Both time-series level and dataset level groupings guarantee that the grouped examples have similar patterns to borrow from each other. 

5.2. Dataset Mixture 

We choose all datasets in Table 3 (the dataset list used to train TimesFM (base)) other than the four Wiki datasets to generate in-context examples for continued training. The Wiki datasets contain millions of time-series that correspond to a wide variety of articles, which need not be related to each other. For the remaining datasets, we set the number of examples in each context as n = 50 and generate contexts from both time-series level and dataset level grouping. Note that if all the time-series in a dataset have a total of N examples, then generating all  Nn

 such contexts is intractable. Therefore, we randomly generate 20 N such groups of n examples as our training contexts. Following the original TimesFM paper, the training data loader samples 90% real data and 10% synthetic, with the real data mixture providing equal weights to the groups: hourly + sub-hourly, daily, weekly, and monthly datasets. Moreover, we provide equal weights to the two kinds of examples i.e., time-series level and dataset level. 

5.3. In-Context Example Selection 

For choosing the 50 examples to be added to the context, we adopt a very simple strategy of using 5 examples from the immediate history of the time-series and the remain-ing examples chosen at random from the history of other time-series in the same datasets. In Section A.9, we experi-ment with some other simple example selection strategies. While we leave a more detailed investigation to future work, our results show that even naive approaches like random selection and selecting examples from the immediate his-tory are sufficient to obtain accuracy gains with in-context fine-tuning. 

6. Experimental Results 

Similar to prior works, we report our results on the Chronos zero-shot benchmarks from Ansari et al. (2024), as well as rolling-window evaluation of the ETT datasets (Zhou et al., 2021). No data from these datasets (not even the training splits) was used in the training of our base model TimesFM (base), or our in-context fine-tuned model TimesFM-ICF. Since TimesFM-ICF uses examples of length 512, we report the numbers of TimesFM (base) with a maximum history length of 512 unless otherwise specified. 

6.1. The Fine-Tuning-per-Dataset Baseline 

In all our experiments, we also compare with an ex-tremely strong baseline TimesFM-FT which is the TimesFM (base) model fine-tuned on the training split of each dataset and then evaluated on the corresponding test split. Our main goal is to study whether TimesFM-ICF can match or surpass the performance of this baseline but in a zero-shot manner (without any gradient updates during inference). In both the benchmarks in Sections 6.2 and 6.3, we perform two kinds of fine-tuning (i) Full: update all the weights of the models (ii) Linear Probe (LP): update just the input and output MLP layers. Then we report the numbers from the best of the two. The details of fine-tuning are provided in Appendix A.4. 

6.2. Out-of-Domain Forecasting   

> Figure 5. Geometric mean of scaled MASE on the OOD Bench-mark. This benchmark is essentially the zero-shot benchmark used in (Ansari et al., 2024), modified slightly to guarantee a zero-shot evaluation of TimesFM-ICF. Our in-context fine-tuning approach improves the performance TimesFM (base) over all other benchmark models, and achieves the same performance as that of TimesFM-FT , the model which separately fine-tunes TimesFM (base) on the training split of each task before making predictions.

The Chronos zero-shot benchmark is a collection of 27 datasets of different training and prediction lengths that cov-ers granularities ranging from minutes to years and domains including finance, demand forecasting, weather, and traffic. We report our results on the 23 datasets from this benchmark that were not used during training of TimesFM-ICF (or the base model). We will refer to this benchmark as the OOD Benchmark and provide more details in Appendix A.2. The datasets contain time-series with vastly different scales, so we cannot aggregate the raw metrics. Therefore, fol-lowing Ansari et al. (2024), we calculate the MASE for all methods and normalize them by the MASE achieved by a seasonal naive baseline that just repeats the last period’s 6In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

values in the history for the whole horizon. Then we report the Geometric Mean of these scaled MASE values across all datasets. Note that when dealing with normalized met-rics it is better to report the Geometric Mean (Fleming & Wallace, 1986). We borrow the official numbers for base-lines from (Ansari et al., 2024) whenever possible. More details about the benchmark, error metrics and baselines are provided in Appendix A.6. We include around 20 baselines including task specific (trained on the training set of each dataset and then evaluated) deep learning models such as DeepAR (Sali-nas et al., 2020), N-BEATS (Oreshkin et al., 2020) and WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016), statistical local (per time-series) models like as Exponential Smoothing(ETS) and ARIMA and other leading pretrained foundation models like Chronos-T5 (Ansari et al., 2024), and LLMTime (Gru-ver et al., 2023), more in Appendix A.2. Note that we are unable to compare with MOIRAI (Woo et al., 2024) be-cause its pretraining data has more than 80% overlap with this benchmark. We extensively compare with MOIRAI on long horizon tasks in Section 6.3. TimesFM-ICF can handle a maximum of 50 examples in its context. Whenever the time-series is long enough we include 5 within series examples (including the history of the time-series to be forecasted on) within the context and the rest of the examples are gathered randomly from other time-series in the same dataset (we ablate on a few other ways of choosing examples in Section A.9). Since there is randomness during inference, we average over 10 runs and report the standard error bar. 

Results. We summarize our results in Figure 5. We can observe that unsurprisingly the per dataset fine-tuned TimesFM-FT is the strongest performer as it starts from a strong zero-shot model and is further finetuned to adapt to the dataset at hand. However, it can be seen that TimesFM-ICF can match the performance of TimesFM-FT completely out of the box at inference time, when supplied with in-context examples. Due to this ability TimesFM-ICF im-proves over TimesFM (base) by 6.8%. Moreover, TimesFM-ICF is better than the next best baseline, PatchTST by 5%. Timing-wise, TimesFM-ICF directly utilizes in-context ex-amples and TimesFM-FT needs to be fine-tuned per dataset. Although TimesFM-ICF requires more time to perform each forecast, it overall completes the OOD Benchmark 16x faster than TimesFM-FT does (25 minutes vs 418 minutes, see Appendix A.7). 

6.3. Long Horizon Forecasting on ETT 

A group of long horizon datasets have been commonly used for benchmarking (mainly) transformer based deep learning algorithms starting from (Zhou et al., 2021). Some of the datasets in these benchmarks are in our pretraining datasets (like Electricity and Traffic). Therefore, for the interest of zero-shot evaluation we use the 4 Electricity Transformer Temperature (ETT) datasets, specifically ETTh1, ETTh2 (hourly) and ETTm1, ETTm2 (15 min). We conduct the same evaluation as in the long se-quence forecasting evaluation (Woo et al., 2024) on these datasets, focusing on the task of predicting horizon lengths 

96 , 192 , 336 , and 720 . We provide rolling validation num-bers for the test time-period which consists the last 1/5-th of the time-points. This is standard for these bench-marks (Nie et al., 2023), where the datasets are split into train:validation:test in the ratio 7:1:2. In addition to the evaluations on these datasets from (Woo et al., 2024, Table 6), we evaluate our TimesFM-ICF against TimesFM (base), and the TimesFM-FT model discussed in Section 6.1. We present the MAE loss for each dataset, averaged over the four horizon lengths 96 , 192 , 336 , 720 , in Table 1. For a detailed breakdown of the MAE losses, see Table 9. Note that since the MAE is computed on scaled datasets in this benchmark (Zhou et al., 2021), we can directly report the arithmetic mean across datasets. We see that TimesFM-ICF rivals or outperforms TimesFM-FT which was fine-tuned explicitly on the target dataset’s distribution. More-over, TimesFM-ICF outperforms or equals the performance of all other baselines. 

6.4. Ablation 

6.4.1. N UMBER OF IN-C ONTEXT EXAMPLES 

An important trade-off between speed and accuracy can be achieved by the number of in-context examples. We perform an ablation study of the same using the short context datasets in the OOD Benchmark i.e., datasets where we can only get one example per time-series (the one whose future we are predicting) and the rest of the examples are generated randomly from all the other time-series across the dataset. We perform the ablation over these datasets for two reasons (i) this removes the complication of the example selection strategy (studied separately later) (ii) short context datasets are where we know for sure that the positive effects in-context fine-tuning are coming from few-shot examples and not from just having a longer context (again studied separately in the next section). The short context datasets are listed in Table 5. We plot the Scaled MASE (GM) vs number of in-context examples in Figure 6. The same figure also shows the total inference time 3. The experiments are repeated 5 times and 

> 3The inference numbers are reported on TPUv5e with 8 tensor cores.

7In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

Table 1. MAE of TimesFM-ICF against other supervised and zero-shot methods on ETT Rolling Window, averaged over forecast horizons 

{96 , 192 , 336 , 720 }. See Table 9 for a detailed breakdown. We bold the numbers which are the best in every row, and including the ones that are within standard error of the best.                                                                   

> Few-shot Zero-shot Task-specific
> TimesFM-ICF TimesFM (Base) Moirai (Small) Moirai (Base) Moirai (Large) TimesFM-FT iTransformer TimesNet PatchTST Crossformer DLinear SCINet FEDformer Dataset ETTh1 0.405 0.417 0.424 0.438 0.469 0.407 0.447 0.450 0.454 0.522 0.452 0.647 0.460 ETTh2 0.378 0.396 0.379 0.382 0.377 0.381 0.407 0.497 0.407 0.683 0.515 0.723 0.449 ETTm1 0.378 0.391 0.410 0.388 0.389 0.371 0.410 0.406 0.400 0.495 0.407 0.481 0.452 ETTm2 0.307 0.329 0.341 0.321 0.320 0.306 0.332 0.332 0.326 0.610 0.401 0.537 0.349

Figure 6. Scaled MASE (GM) vs number of in-context examples over the short context datasets in the OOD Benchmark. We also plot the total inference time for all the datasets as we vary the number of examples. All numbers are averaged over 5 runs with the corresponding one standard error. 

the standard error bars are reported. We can see that the error decreases monotonically as the number of in-context examples are increased. At the same time, the total inference time increases, signifying a trade-off. 6.4.2. L ONGER HISTORY 

In this section, we compare the performance of TimesFM-ICF with a modified version of TimesFM (base) pretrained 4

and evaluated with a longer history L = 2048 which we will refer to as TimesFM (LH). We provide the aggregate scaled MASE on the OOD Benchmark in Table 2. We restrict TimesFM-ICF to use at most 5 in-context examples (of length 512 each), so it is a fair comparison. Dataset TimesFM-ICF TimesFM (LH) TimesFM (base) OOD Benchmark 0.777 0.811 0.834 

Table 2. Comparison with longer context TimesFM (LH) model, which has a maximum history of 2048. We report the Scaled MASE (GM) on the OOD Benchmark. 

We can see that TimesFM (LH) yields a modest 2.4% im-provement over TimesFM (base) (maximum history of 512) while TimesFM-ICF yields a 6.8% improvement. 

> 4

Pretraining performed in a manner similar to the latest version of the TimesFM Hugging Face repo. 

This shows that our technique of in-context fine-tuning can be more effective than training a longer history model, espe-cially when there is a mix of short-history and long-history time-series. This is because, for in-context fine-tuning, many short time-series can be packed as in-context exam-ples inside the context, while for the case of usual long history training such time-series will just be padded and most of the context is wasted. As shown in the detailed results in Table 6, the long history model performs at par or very slightly better on longer datasets like ERCOT, but degrades on shorter datasets like CIF and Toursim. 

7. Conclusions 

In this paper, we introduce a methodology for in-context fine-tuning of a time-series foundation model for forecast-ing. In particular, we start with a base foundation model and adapt it to be able to effectively utilize, at inference time, not just the history of the target time-series for forecasting, but also in-context examples from related time-series. Our results show that in-context fine-tuning can lead to signifi-cantly better zero-shot performance on popular forecasting benchmarks compared to the base foundation model and state-of-the-art supervised models. Furthermore, it even matches the performance of a version of the base foundation model that is explicitly fine-tuned on the target domain. While we have chosen a specific base time-series foundation model (TimesFM) for our in-context fine-tuning approach, it would be an interesting direction of future work to study these adaptations for other base foundation models. It would also be interesting to study better forms of relative positional encodings specifically designed for handling in-context ex-amples and length generalization. 

Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 8In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

References 

Ahn, K., Cheng, X., Daneshmand, H., and Sra, S. Trans-formers learn to implement preconditioned gradient de-scent for in-context learning. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 36, 2024. Ansari, A. F., Stella, L., Turkmen, A. C., Zhang, X., Mer-cado, P., Shen, H., Shchur, O., Rangapuram, S. S., Arango, S. P., Kapoor, S., Zschiegner, J., Maddix, D. C., Wang, H., Mahoney, M. W., Torkkola, K., Wilson, A. G., Bohlke-Schneider, M., and Wang, B. Chronos: Learning the language of time series. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. Assimakopoulos, V. and Nikolopoulos, K. The theta model: a decomposition approach to forecasting. International journal of forecasting , 16(4):521–530, 2000. Box, G. E. and Jenkins, G. M. Some recent advances in forecasting and control. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C (Applied Statistics) , 17(2):91–109, 1968. Brown, T. B. et al. Language models are few-shot learn-ers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2020. Challu, C., Olivares, K. G., Oreshkin, B. N., Garza, F., Mergenthaler, M., and Dubrawski, A. NHITS: Neural Hierarchical Interpolation for Time Series forecasting. In The Association for the Advancement of Artificial In-telligence Conference 2023 (AAAI 2023) , 2023. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12886 .Chang, C., Peng, W.-C., and Chen, T.-F. Llm4ts: Two-stage fine-tuning for time-series forecasting with pre-trained llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08469 , 2023. Chen, Y., Zhong, R., Zha, S., Karypis, G., and He, H. Meta-learning via language model in-context tuning. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , 2022. Das, A., Kong, W., Leach, A., Mathur, S. K., Sen, R., and Yu, R. Long-term forecasting with TiDE: Time-series dense encoder. Transactions on Machine Learn-ing Research , 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=pCbC3aQB5W .Das, A., Kong, W., Sen, R., and Zhou, Y. A decoder-only foundation model for time-series forecasting. Interna-tional conference on machine learning , 2024. Dooley, S., Khurana, G. S., Mohapatra, C., Naidu, S. V., and White, C. Forecastpfn: Synthetically-trained zero-shot forecasting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. Fleming, P. J. and Wallace, J. J. How not to lie with statis-tics: the correct way to summarize benchmark results. 

Communications of the ACM , 29(3):218–221, 1986. Garg, S., Tsipras, D., Liang, P. S., and Valiant, G. What can transformers learn in-context? a case study of sim-ple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:30583–30598, 2022. Garza, A. and Mergenthaler-Canseco, M. Timegpt-1. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03589 , 2023. Goswami, M., Szafer, K., Choudhry, A., Cai, Y., Li, S., and Dubrawski, A. MOMENT: A family of open time-series foundation models. In Proceedings of the 41st Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 16115– 16152, 2024. Gruver, N., Finzi, M., Qiu, S., and Wilson, A. G. Large language models are zero-shot time series forecasters. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pp. 19622–19635, 2023. Haviv, A., Ram, O., Press, O., Izsak, P., and Levy, O. Trans-former language models without positional encodings still learn positional information. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pp. 1382–1390, 2022. Hyndman, R. J. and Koehler, A. B. Another look at mea-sures of forecast accuracy. International journal of fore-casting , 22(4):679–688, 2006. Jiang, J., Han, C., Jiang, W., Zhao, W. X., and Wang, J. Libcity: A unified library towards efficient and compre-hensive urban spatial-temporal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14343 , 2023. Koenker, R. and Hallock, K. F. Quantile regression. Journal of economic perspectives , 15(4):143–156, 2001. Li, S., You, C., Guruganesh, G., Ainslie, J., Ontanon, S., Zaheer, M., Sanghai, S., Yang, Y., Kumar, S., and Bho-janapalli, S. Functional interpolation for relative positions improves long context transformers. In The Twelfth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Lim, B. and Zohren, S. Time-series forecasting with deep learning: a survey. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A , 379(2194):20200209, 2021. Liu, P. J., Saleh, M., Pot, E., Goodrich, B., Sepassi, R., Kaiser, L., and Shazeer, N. Generating wikipedia by sum-marizing long sequences. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. Min, S., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., and Hajishirzi, H. Metaicl: Learning to learn in context. Association for Computational Linguistics , 2022a. 9In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

Min, S., Lyu, X., Holtzman, A., Artetxe, M., Lewis, M., Hajishirzi, H., and Zettlemoyer, L. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? In EMNLP , 2022b. Nie, Y., Nguyen, N. H., Sinthong, P., and Kalagnanam, J. A time series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers. International conference on learning representations , 2023. Oreshkin, B. N., Carpov, D., Chapados, N., and Bengio, Y. N-beats: Neural basis expansion analysis for interpretable time series forecasting. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Petropoulos, F. and Svetunkov, I. A simple combination of univariate models. International journal of forecasting ,36(1):110–115, 2020. Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I., et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9, 2019. Rasul, K., Ashok, A., Williams, A. R., Khorasani, A., Adamopoulos, G., Bhagwatkar, R., Bilo ˇs, M., Ghonia, H., Hassen, N., Schneider, A., et al. Lag-llama: Towards foundation models for time series forecasting. In R0-FoMo: Robustness of Few-shot and Zero-shot Learning in Large Foundation Models , 2023. Salinas, D., Flunkert, V., Gasthaus, J., and Januschowski, T. Deepar: Probabilistic forecasting with autoregressive recurrent networks. International Journal of Forecasting ,36(3):1181–1191, 2020. Salvador, S. and Chan, P. Toward accurate dynamic time warping in linear time and space. Intell. Data Anal. , 11 (5):561–580, October 2007. Sen, R., Yu, H.-F., and Dhillon, I. S. Think globally, act locally: A deep neural network approach to high-dimensional time series forecasting. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Serra, J. and Arcos, J. L. An empirical evaluation of simi-larity measures for time series classification. Knowledge-Based Systems , 67:305–314, 2014. Shi, W., Min, S., Lomeli, M., Zhou, C., Li, M., Lin, X. V., Smith, N. A., Zettlemoyer, L., Yih, W.-t., and Lewis, M. In-context pretraining: Language modeling beyond document boundaries. In The Twelfth International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2024. van den Oord, A., Dieleman, S., Zen, H., Simonyan, K., Vinyals, O., Graves, A., Kalchbrenner, N., Senior, A., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio. In Proc. SSW 2016 , pp. 125–125, 2016. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. At-tention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Von Oswald, J., Niklasson, E., Randazzo, E., Sacramento, J., Mordvintsev, A., Zhmoginov, A., and Vladymyrov, M. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023. Wei, J., Bosma, M., Zhao, V. Y., Guu, K., Yu, A. W., Lester, B., Du, N., Dai, A. M., and Le, Q. V. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. ICLR , 2022a. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022b. Wei, J., Wei, J., Tay, Y., Tran, D., Webson, A., Lu, Y., Chen, X., Liu, H., Huang, D., Zhou, D., et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03846 , 2023. Woo, G., Liu, C., Kumar, A., Xiong, C., Savarese, S., and Sahoo, D. Unified training of universal time series fore-casting transformers. International conference on ma-chine learning , 2024. Ye, X. and Durrett, G. The unreliability of explanations in few-shot prompting for textual reasoning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:30378–30392, 2022. Zeng, A., Chen, M., Zhang, L., and Xu, Q. Are transformers effective for time series forecasting? In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 37, pp. 11121–11128, 2023. Zhou, H., Zhang, S., Peng, J., Zhang, S., Li, J., Xiong, H., and Zhang, W. Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , 2021. Zhou, T., Niu, P., Sun, L., Jin, R., et al. One fits all: Power general time series analysis by pretrained lm. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:43322–43355, 2023. 10 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

A. Appendix 

A.1. Illustrative Examples 

We illustrate visually in Figure 7 how in-context examples can help disambiguate the prediction tasks, by plotting the actual forecasts from TimesFM-ICF with and without the in-context examples. In the left two figures, the history is not sufficiently informative for the model to make an accurate prediction. By providing in-context examples together with this short history (see the right two figures), however, the model is able to make a more accurate forecast.  

> (a) In-context examples help the history disambiguate between an increasing trend and an oscillating seasonality.
> (b) In-context examples help the history disambiguate between an increasing linear trend and a triangular wave.
> Figure 7. Two illustrative examples on how in-context examples can help disambiguate the prediction tasks, that likely patterns based solely on the history can get proved or disproved by the patterns from the in-context examples.

In Figure 8, we plot the forecasts of TimesFM-ICF on the 5 time-series in the Monash Australian Electricity Demand dataset, operating our model in three modes: 0 in-context examples, 20 (random) in-context examples, and 50 in-context examples (5 of which are within-series examples). These three configurations have increasingly better MASE scores on this dataset (with MASE values 1, .9, and .8, respectively). The predictions visually appear to improve with the MASE values. 

A.2. Baselines on the OOD Benchmark 

For the OOD Benchmark which is derived from the zero-shot Chronos benchmark, we borrow benchmark evaluation numbers from Table 10 in (Ansari et al., 2024) for our evaluations of the Chronos models, as well as that of LLMTime (Gruver et al., 2023), ForecastPFN (Dooley et al., 2024), Lag-Llama (Rasul et al., 2023), PatchTST (Nie et al., 2023), DeepAR (Salinas et al., 2020), WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016), TFT (Lim & Zohren, 2021) DLinear (Zeng et al., 2023), N-HiTS (Challu et al., 2023), N-BEATS (Oreshkin et al., 2020), GPT4TS (Zhou et al., 2023), SCUM (Petropoulos & Svetunkov, 2020) AutoETS, AutoARIMA, AutoTheta, Na ¨ıve, and Seasonal Na ¨ıve (Assimakopoulos & Nikolopoulos, 2000). We omit the Moirai (Woo et al., 2024) evaluations from this benchmark, since this model’s training data has more than 80% overlap with the benchmark. 11 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

Figure 8. Visualization of TimesFM-ICF predictions on the Monash Australian Electricity dataset 

12 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

We conduct the remaining evaluations ourselves, using the datasets available at this URL from the Chronos authors. We detail the datasets used in our evaluation in Table 4. To ensure our evaluations are zero-shot, we omit the M4 Quarterly, M4 Yearly 5, Traffic 6, and Weather 7 datasets from the Chronos zero-shot benchmark. We give a detailed breakdown in Appendix A.6. 

A.3. Details of Pretraining TimesFM (base) 

We start from the model architecture in Das et al. (2024) then create TimesFM (base) with 16 attention heads, 50 layers, an input patch length of 32 and output patch length of 128. The model dimension is set to 1280. We use the learning rate schedule in (Vaswani et al., 2017) with peak learning rate of 5e − 4. The hidden dims of both the residual block and the FFN in the transformer layers are set as the same as model dimensions. We keep layer norm in transformer layers but not in the residual blocks. The pretraining datasets are detailed in Table 3. The only difference between the model in Das et al. (2024) and our base model is that we use No Positional Encodings (NoPE) instead of the absolute positional encoding (Vaswani et al., 2017). Based on the findings in Haviv et al. (2022), we create the pretrained TimesFM (base) checkpoint with NoPE, in contrast to the absolute positional encodings (Vaswani et al., 2017) used in the original TimesFM model. We note that we can achieve the same accuracy reported in the original TimesFM paper without using any positional encodings. Indeed it has been hypothesized in Haviv et al. (2022) that the presence of causal attention itself can encode positional information when there are more than one stacked transformer layers. The advantages of NoPE for our continued pretraining are two fold: (i) NoPE models usually have better length generalization, which is particularly important here since we increase the prompt length by adding in-context examples to the context. (ii) If we use the original absolute positional encodings used in (Das et al., 2024), the meaning of these positional encodings in the base model would be different from their meaning during the continued pretraining with in-context examples. This could cause problems for the continued pretraining phase. Empirically, NoPE leads to no loss in accuracy on validation during training, and works on par with other positional encodings that generalize length, e.g., FIRE (Li et al., 2024), see Figure 9. 

A.4. Details of TimesFM-FT: Fine-Tuning Per Dataset 

On both the OOD Benchmark and the Long Horizon ETT, we also compare with TimesFM-FT which fine-tunes on the train split for every dataset and the forecasting on the corresponding test split. For all our fine-tuning runs, we use a batch size of 16 and (1) up to 10k iterations for the OOD Benchmark and (2) up to 100k for the Long Horizon ETT. We use a maximum learning rate of 1e-3, with 500-step linear warm-up and exponential decay. Note that this means that the fine-tuned model will see many more training examples than the in-context examples given to our model. For the fine-tuning runs, we use the same decoder only loss function that was used in the original pretraining of TimesFM (base). We do two kinds of fine-tuning: • Full: All weights in the model are updated during fine-tuning. • Linear Probing (LP): We hold the transformer weights fixed and only update the parameters in the input and output residual blocks. 

A.5. Additional Details of TimesFM-ICF 

We continue to train TimesFM-ICF model from TimesFM (base). Therefore, most of the parameters in the model remain the same. Here, are the key training details that are unique to TimesFM-ICF: • Separator Token: We have a trainable separator token that is also updated during the continued pretraining. The token is nothing but a learnt embedding whose dimension is equal to the model dimension i.e. 1280 in our case. 

> 5https://github.com/Mcompetitions/M4-methods
> 6https://zenodo.org/record/4656132
> 7https://zenodo.org/record/4654822

13 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

• Number of Examples: We use a maximum of n = 50 in-context examples for each context during training. • Padding: In short datasets like M4 yearly and quarterly, each time-series might have number of time-points much less than T = 640 . Sometimes the number of time-points are even less than our input patch length p = 32 . For such cases, a whole time-series can fit into one of the n examples and they are preprocessed in the following manner: 

– If the length of the time-series l is less than p, we left pad with k padding time-points such that p < k + l < 2p.This is because we want the decoder only model to predict something meaningful for the second patch after seeing the first patch and if not, is penalized by the loss on the second patch. If the l > p , we do not need to perform this left padding. 

– Lastly, we right pad such that the length of the total padded example is T = 640 .

– Note that the last patch in such examples would be padded from the right, i.e., they will have real time-series values for the first few points and padding for the rest. We make sure that such incomplete from the right patches are not attended by subsequent tokens belonging to examples coming after. The continued pretraining datasets are detailed in Table 3. 

A.6. OOD Benchmark Detailed Results 

We give a detailed breakdown of the zero-shot evaluations on the datasets from Table 4 (displayed in Figure 5) in Table 6 with additional baselines as mentioned in Appendix A.2. We report the mean absolute scaled error (MASE) (Hyndman & Koehler, 2006), which, for a given time-series y1: L+H = ( y1, . . . , y L, . . . , y L+H ) with context L and horizon H and seasonality parameter S, together with a predicted time-series byL+1: L+H = (ˆ yL+1 , . . . , ˆyL+H ), is defined as the mean absolute error for the forecast normalized by the seasonal na¨ ıve forecast error on the context: MASE (byL+1: L+H , y1: L+H ) = L − SH

PL+Ht=L+1 |ˆyt − yt|

PL−St=1 |yt − yt+S | .

Each evaluation of TimesFM-ICF is averaged over 10 random seeds, where the randomness corresponds to the random selection of in-context examples used to make predictions. The reported MASE numbers are averaged over the five evaluations of the dataset. The confidence intervals in Table 6 correspond to one standard deviation of the 5 evaluations, averaged over the dataset. Since TimesFM (base) supports probabilistic forecasting, in Table 7, we additionally report the weighted quantile loss (WQL), which averages the quantile loss QL α of (Koenker & Hallock, 2001) over quantiles α ∈ { 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9}. The quantile loss is defined as follows: given quantile α ∈ (0 , 1) and predicted quantiles q(α) = ( q(α)

> L+1

, . . . , q (α) 

> L+H

) for a time-series y with context L and horizon H, the quantile loss at level α of an observation yt is: QL α(qαt , y t) = 

(

α(yt − q(α) 

> t

) if yt > q (α)

> t

(1 − α)( q(α) 

> t

− yt) otherwise The weighted quantile loss over a dataset D, where each yi ∈ D has a predicted quantile q(α) 

> i

, is given by: WQL α =2 P 

> i∈|D| PL+Ht=L+1

QL α(qαi,t , y i,t )

P

> i∈|D|

PL+Ht=L+1 |yi,t |

Then, the weighted quantile loss is the average of WQL α over α ∈ { 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9}.Note that, in addition to the detailed results in Tables 6 and 7, we additionally report the geometric mean of the MASE on each dataset, normalized by the MASE of the seasonal na ¨ıve baseline. This geometric mean is then averaged over the 5 evaluation runs. We report both the geometric mean of the 23 datasets from the Chronos zero-shot benchmark for which we are zero-shot (see Table 4), i.e., that were not used during training of TimesFM-ICF or the base model TimesFM (base), as “Geometric Mean (ZS)”. We also report the the geometric mean over all 27 datasets from the Chronos zero-shot benchmark as “Geometric Mean (All)”. 14 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models  

> Table 3. List of datasets included in pretraining TimesFM (base). All datasets except the Wiki datasets are also repurposed for continued pretraining TimesFM-ICF with in-context examples. The datasets labeled LOTSA are obtained from the LOTSA collection (Woo et al., 2024). For continued pretraining, the Wiki dataset can be clustered into groups of related articles, and the time-series for each group could be deemed to form a separate dataset. But we leave such preprocessing of the Wiki dataset for future work and leave these datasets out of our continued pretraining.

Dataset Granularity # Time series Synthetic 3,000,000 Electricity Hourly 321 Traffic Hourly 862 Weather (Zhou et al., 2021) 10 Min 42 Favorita Sales Daily 111,840 LibCity (Jiang et al., 2023) 15 Min 6,159 M4 hourly Hourly 414 M4 daily Daily 4,227 M4 monthly Monthly 48,000 M4 quarterly Quarterly 24,000 M4 yearly Yearly 22,739 Wiki hourly Hourly 5,608,693 Wiki daily Daily 68,448,204 Wiki weekly Weekly 66,579,850 Wiki monthly Monthly 63,151,306 Trends hourly Hourly 22,435 Trends daily Daily 22,435 Trends weekly Weekly 22,435 Trends monthly Monthly 22,435 LOTSA Azure VM Traces 5 Min 7,179,194 LOTSA Residential LoadPower 1 Min 6,861,408 LOTSA Borg Cluster Data 5 Min 6,651,848 LOTSA Residential PvPower 1 Min 5,890,848 LOTSA QTraffic 15 Min 4,334,208 LOTSA London Smart Meters 30 Min 2,681,312 LOTSA Taxi 30 Min 2,175,488 LOTSA Solar Power 4 Sec 115,584 LOTSA Wind Power 4 Sec 115,584 LOTSA Kdd2022 10 Min 77184 LOTSA Largest 5 Min 91,005,824 LOTSA Era5 Hourly 728,078,400 LOTSA Buildings Hourly 22,937,600 LOTSA Cmip6 Daily 892,769,472 LOTSA China Air Quality Hourly 593,532 LOTSA Beijing Air Quality Hourly 76,032 LOTSA Subseasonal Daily 165,504 LOTSA Kaggle WebTraffic Weekly Weekly 4,642,016 LOTSA CdC Flu Weekly 9,472 LOTSA Godaddy Monthly 200,640 

A.7. Detailed Timing on the OOD Benchmark 

We provide the comparison between TimesFM-ICF and TimesFM-FT regarding their benchmark timing and accuracy in Table 8. For a fair comparison we calculate the time here assuming that fine-tuning and inference tasks on all datasets are completed in a one-by-one sequential manner. Fine-tuning on each dataset requires more time than applying in-context examples while does not always guarantee performance over TimesFM-ICF. 15 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models  

> Table 4. Details of the OOD Benchmark: We report our results on the 23 datasets from the Chronos zero-shot benchmark that were not used during training of TimesFM-ICF or the base model TimesFM (base).

Dataset Category Frequency Num TS MinLen AvgLen MaxLen Horizon Australian Electricity energy 30min 5 230736 231052 232272 48 Car Parts retail 1M 2674 51 51 51 12 CIF 2016 banking 1M 72 28 98 120 12 Covid Deaths healthcare 1D 266 212 212 212 30 Dominick retail 1D 100014 201 296 399 8ERCOT Load energy 1H 8 154854 154854 154854 24 ETT (15 Min., Last Window) energy 15min 14 69680 69680 69680 24 ETT (Hourly, Last Window) energy 1H 14 17420 17420 17420 24 Exchange Rate finance 1B 8 7588 7588 7588 30 FRED-MD economics 1M 107 728 728 728 12 Hospital healthcare 1M 767 84 84 84 12 M1 (Monthly) various 1M 617 48 90 150 18 M1 (Quarterly) various 3M 203 18 48 114 8M1 (Yearly) various 1Y 181 15 24 58 6M3 (Monthly) various 1M 1428 66 117 144 18 M3 (Quarterly) various 3M 756 24 48 72 8M3 (Yearly) various 1Y 645 20 28 47 6M5 retail 1D 30490 124 1562 1969 28 NN5 (Daily) finance 1D 111 791 791 791 56 NN5 (Weekly) finance 1W 111 113 113 113 8Tourism (Monthly) various 1M 366 91 298 333 24 Tourism (Quarterly) various 1Q 427 30 99 130 8Tourism (Yearly) various 1Y 518 11 24 47 4All timing is reported on TPUv5e with 4 tensor cores. 

A.8. ETT Rolling Window 

We provide the detailed results of the mean absolute error (MAE) of TimesFM-ICF against other supervised and zero-shot methods on ETT Rolling Window in Table 9. The MAE of a prediction byL+1: L+H of a time-series y1: L+H is: MAE (byL+1: L+H , y1: L+H ) = 1

H ∥byL+1: L+H − yL+1: L+H ∥1.

Note that, in addition to the baselines Table 1, we additionally evaluate against the Moirai (Large) model operating in multivariate forecasting mode. We refer to Moirai operating in this mode as Moirai-MV. We provide Moirai-MV with a total of 50 multivariate features – 21 (the maximum possible number for these datasets) from the time-series’ history, and 29 

features from randomly selected time series. We select this for several reasons: (i) by selecting the largest possible context history, we provide the model with the largest possible number of relevant features, (ii) according to (Woo et al., 2024), Moirai is trained to accommodate at least 50 multivariate features, and (iii) our model is trained to accommodate a maximum of 50 in-context examples. We choose each multivariate feature to have the same length ( 512 ) since both TimesFM-ICF and Moirai-MV is trained to accommodate such example lengths. Note that we provide exactly the same features/in-context examples to Moirai-MV and to TimesFM-ICF , for ease of comparison. Moirai-MV’s performance degrades on these datasets with the additional multivariate features provided. We remark, however, that the performance degradation of the Moirai-MV model may be explained by a subtle distinction between in-context examples and multivariate features. All multivariate features used when training Moirai are assumed to be temporally aligned. By contrast, the in-context examples provided during our evaluations are from different time-windows. Thus, by providing in-context examples as multivariate features for Moirai-MV, we are evaluating the model outside of its intended use. Nonetheless, we include this result in the appendix (with this caveat) to demonstrate that na ¨ıvely concatenating related time-series as multivariate features may not work out-of-the-box. 16 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

Table 5. Part of the OOD Benchmark which only has room for one in-context example per time-series. The is used for the ablation study in Section 6.4.1. We exclude Dominick as evaluation takes a significant amount of time on that dataset especially when averaged over multiple runs. 

Dataset Category Frequency Num TS MinLen AvgLen MaxLen Horizon Car Parts retail 1M 2674 51 51 51 12 CIF 2016 banking 1M 72 28 98 120 12 Covid Deaths healthcare 1D 266 212 212 212 30 FRED-MD economics 1M 107 728 728 728 12 Hospital healthcare 1M 767 84 84 84 12 M1 (Monthly) various 1M 617 48 90 150 18 M1 (Quarterly) various 3M 203 18 48 114 8M1 (Yearly) various 1Y 181 15 24 58 6M3 (Monthly) various 1M 1428 66 117 144 18 M3 (Quarterly) various 3M 756 24 48 72 8M3 (Yearly) various 1Y 645 20 28 47 6M5 retail 1D 30490 124 1562 1969 28 NN5 (Daily) finance 1D 111 791 791 791 56 NN5 (Weekly) finance 1W 111 113 113 113 8Tourism (Monthly) various 1M 366 91 298 333 24 Tourism (Quarterly) various 1Q 427 30 99 130 8Tourism (Yearly) various 1Y 518 11 24 47 4

Table 6. OOD Benchmark (MASE) 

Category Pretrained Models (Few Shot) Pretrained Models (Zero Shot) Pretrained Models (Other) Task Specific Models Local Models Model TimesFM-ICL TimesFM (Base) TimesFM-LH Chronos-T5 (Large) Chronos-T5 (Base) Chronos-T5 (Small) Chronos-T5 (Mini) Chronos-GPT2 LLMTime ForecastPFN Lag-Llama TimesFM-FT PatchTST DeepAR WaveNet TFT DLinear N-HiTS N-BEATS GPT4TS SCUM AutoETS AutoTheta AutoARIMA Seasonal Naive Naive Australian Electricity 0.805 ± 0.010 1.529 1.313 1.333 1.319 1.399 1.114 1.310 1.186 2.158 1.635 0.753 0.871 1.473 0.997 0.810 1.278 0.794 0.828 1.161 1.427 2.391 0.897 1.393 1.253 2.362 Car Parts 0.868 ± 0.0002 0.922 0.922 0.906 0.899 0.887 0.891 0.881 - 2.657 0.816 0.867 0.803 0.798 0.817 0.799 0.879 0.803 0.803 0.891 1.157 1.185 1.229 - 1.201 -CIF 2016 0.877 ± 0.003 0.948 0.947 0.986 0.981 0.989 1.051 1.046 1.384 3.588 2.235 0.860 1.537 1.363 1.309 1.553 1.145 1.389 1.440 0.960 0.907 0.957 1.002 1.006 1.289 1.263 Covid Deaths 44.279 ± 0.077 47.399 47.391 42.550 42.687 42.670 43.621 48.215 32.143 91.515 78.456 39.904 36.465 38.203 102.457 30.635 40.418 31.771 31.730 75.909 33.595 38.114 45.407 31.705 46.912 46.912 Dominick 0.900 ± 0.0002 0.935 0.935 0.818 0.816 0.819 0.833 0.820 - 3.274 1.250 0.835 0.867 0.851 0.812 0.800 0.880 0.782 0.782 1.813 0.891 0.885 1.016 - 0.871 0.871 ERCOT Load 0.669 ± 0.013 0.633 0.690 0.617 0.550 0.573 0.588 0.561 1.319 3.975 0.834 0.644 0.553 1.197 0.780 0.690 0.651 0.615 0.648 0.558 1.308 2.826 1.306 1.284 0.761 4.234 ETT (15 Min.) 0.653 ± 0.004 0.767 0.615 0.741 0.739 0.710 0.792 0.796 1.042 1.138 0.967 0.742 0.652 0.874 1.339 0.962 0.724 0.643 0.659 0.574 0.673 1.183 0.583 0.879 1.169 1.164 ETT (Hourly) 0.801 ± 0.003 0.838 0.853 0.735 0.789 0.789 0.797 0.768 1.232 1.833 1.002 0.798 0.729 0.814 1.509 0.875 0.695 0.811 0.782 0.768 0.850 1.139 0.900 0.977 0.932 1.651 Exchange Rate 1.632 ± 0.036 2.113 1.970 2.375 2.433 2.252 2.030 2.335 1.743 7.583 3.087 1.871 1.540 1.615 3.105 2.361 1.459 2.041 2.149 2.709 1.749 1.643 1.648 1.882 1.740 1.874 FRED-MD 0.610 ± 0.003 0.653 0.492 0.500 0.486 0.496 0.483 0.468 0.513 2.621 2.283 0.592 0.745 0.621 0.849 0.929 0.713 0.696 0.635 0.693 0.492 0.544 0.566 0.473 1.101 0.622 Hospital 0.752 ± 0.0004 0.780 0.780 0.810 0.810 0.815 0.817 0.831 0.861 1.775 0.939 0.763 0.859 0.804 0.857 0.799 0.940 0.781 0.760 0.793 0.748 0.760 0.761 0.820 0.921 0.968 M1 (Monthly) 1.013 ± 0.0015 1.052 1.052 1.090 1.117 1.169 1.174 1.182 1.415 2.172 1.875 1.083 1.208 1.122 1.266 1.326 1.369 1.333 1.236 1.198 1.023 1.072 1.099 1.153 1.314 1.468 M1 (Quarterly) 1.652 ± 0.005 1.709 1.709 1.713 1.739 1.764 1.785 1.785 1.802 9.931 3.036 1.704 1.920 1.741 1.904 2.144 1.943 2.061 2.043 1.958 1.602 1.710 1.683 1.770 2.078 1.952 M1 (Yearly) 4.299 ± 0.008 3.591 3.592 4.301 4.624 4.659 4.958 4.751 4.077 23.089 7.149 3.284 4.042 3.685 4.727 4.316 11.565 5.568 6.212 3.675 3.571 4.110 3.697 3.870 4.894 4.894 M3 (Monthly) 0.837 ± 0.001 0.832 0.832 0.857 0.868 0.885 0.900 0.930 0.996 2.240 1.846 0.811 1.225 0.943 0.950 0.916 1.161 0.899 0.883 0.950 0.827 0.869 0.861 0.933 1.146 1.175 M3 (Quarterly) 1.140 ± 0.002 1.201 1.202 1.181 1.199 1.256 1.289 1.241 1.450 10.176 2.886 1.161 1.264 1.209 1.257 1.160 1.572 1.202 1.147 1.448 1.135 1.125 1.130 1.419 1.425 1.464 M3 (Yearly) 2.779 ± 0.004 2.818 2.817 3.106 3.209 3.276 3.385 3.158 3.140 18.728 5.114 2.796 2.949 2.827 3.026 2.860 3.435 3.432 3.547 3.418 2.703 2.696 2.613 3.165 3.172 3.172 M4 (Quarterly) 1.220 ± 0.001 0.966 0.966 1.216 1.231 1.246 1.271 1.312 - 6.927 2.663 0.970 1.150 1.254 1.241 1.248 1.229 1.157 1.129 1.215 1.145 1.188 1.193 1.276 1.602 1.477 M4 (Yearly) 3.311 ± 0.002 2.549 2.549 3.606 3.678 3.651 3.743 3.933 - - 5.866 2.554 3.072 3.178 3.221 3.119 3.295 - - 3.374 3.013 3.374 3.124 3.730 3.974 3.974 M5 0.924 ± 0.00003 0.916 0.920 0.944 0.939 0.940 0.944 0.969 - 1.530 0.965 0.904 0.919 0.956 0.959 0.909 1.027 0.917 0.917 0.935 1.096 1.101 1.100 1.057 1.399 1.399 NN5 (Daily) 0.578 ± 0.001 0.612 0.603 0.573 0.585 0.615 0.642 0.601 0.953 1.375 0.992 0.572 0.575 0.585 0.585 0.556 0.604 0.571 0.571 0.720 1.052 1.039 1.073 1.214 1.292 1.292 NN5 (Weekly) 0.919 ± 0.003 0.865 0.865 0.940 0.938 0.944 0.947 0.963 0.968 1.349 1.141 0.933 0.877 0.920 1.034 0.896 0.966 0.919 1.014 1.268 0.974 0.978 0.984 0.995 1.063 1.063 Tourism (Monthly) 1.487 ± 0.002 1.623 1.623 1.761 1.828 1.900 1.950 1.783 2.139 4.348 3.030 1.516 1.572 1.529 1.629 1.686 1.551 1.514 1.486 1.573 1.441 1.497 1.680 1.573 1.631 3.591 Tourism (Quarterly) 1.708 ± 0.0041 1.799 1.798 1.677 1.717 1.730 1.829 1.828 1.916 5.595 3.695 1.776 1.723 1.586 1.769 1.729 1.690 1.585 1.618 1.750 1.501 1.590 1.658 1.661 1.699 3.633 Tourism (Yearly) 3.224 ± 0.006 3.496 3.496 3.755 3.900 3.901 4.048 3.862 3.309 12.093 3.755 3.565 3.138 3.702 4.130 3.047 3.406 3.448 3.564 - 3.276 3.138 3.078 4.043 3.552 3.552 Traffic 0.837 ± 0.001 0.573 0.730 0.804 0.828 0.837 0.850 0.818 0.973 1.909 0.829 0.592 0.790 0.737 0.797 0.880 0.821 0.927 0.968 0.787 - 1.685 1.794 - 1.077 2.052 Weather 0.824 ± 0.001 0.871 0.830 0.822 0.824 0.836 0.853 0.858 - 2.003 1.001 0.782 0.860 0.911 0.945 0.913 0.997 0.910 0.888 0.972 0.933 1.079 0.991 0.907 1.004 1.004 Geometric Mean (ZS) 0.777 ± 0.003 0.834 0.812 0.827 0.834 0.844 0.852 0.852 0.960 2.543 1.313 0.776 0.818 0.852 0.977 0.851 0.905 0.824 0.830 0.909 0.837 0.943 0.856 0.908 1.000 1.195 Geometric Mean (All) 0.778 ± 0.002 0.805 0.792 0.824 0.832 0.841 0.850 0.852 0.962 2.450 1.291 0.753 0.810 0.843 0.951 0.847 0.894 0.830 0.835 0.896 0.838 0.953 0.875 0.908 1.000 1.189 

A.9. Selecting In-Context Examples 

A practical consideration for in-context fine-tuning is the question of how to choose the (up to 50) related in-context examples to put in the context window (at both training and inference time). While our in-context fine-tuning methodology is compatible with any algorithm for in-context example selection, in this paper we use a very simple strategy of choosing for each time-series forecasting target a combination of a) a few consecutive examples chosen from the immediate history of the time-series to be forecasted, and b) many examples chosen at random (across timestamp and time-series) from the past history of other time-series in the same dataset. We also tried a more sophisticated approach that uses dynamic time warping (DTW) (Serra & Arcos, 2014; Salvador & Chan, 2007) to select the top 20% most “similar” time series to the time-series of interest, and restricting the random examples from within those time-series. In Figure 10 we perform a lightweight ablation study to understand the effects of these approaches on the performance of in-context fine-tuning on the OOD Benchmark, and observe very minor differences in performance among the example selection approaches. Choosing 5 examples from the immediate history, and the remaining 45 examples at random seemed to outperform the other three approaches (and is indeed the approach we use for TimesFM-ICF in the OOD Benchmark results). As a simple test how our simple choice of in-context example selection could be improved, we performed a grid-search over various splits of in-series and random in-context examples as follows: First, we constructed a validation dataset from the training portion of a subset of the Monash datasets (specifically: weather, traffic, australian electricity, ercot, ETTm, and ETTh). We chose these datasets because they contained many training examples long enough to construct up to 20 17 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

Table 7. OOD Benchmark (WQL) 

Category Pretrained Models (Few Shot) Pretrained Models (Zero Shot) Pretrained Models (Other) Task Specific Models Local Models Model TimesFM-ICL TimesFM (Base) TimesFM-LH Chronos-T5 (Large) Chronos-T5 (Base) Chronos-T5 (Small) Chronos-T5 (Mini) Chronos-GPT2 LLMTime Lag-Llama TimesFM-FT PatchTST DeepAR WaveNet TFT DLinear N-HiTS N-BEATS SCUM AutoETS AutoTheta AutoARIMA Seasonal Naive Naive Australian Electricity 0.037 0.078 0.067 0.067 0.075 0.074 0.063 0.078 0.069 0.097 0.033 0.037 0.087 0.052 0.036 0.066 0.034 0.038 0.070 0.125 0.055 0.073 0.084 0.159 CIF 2016 0.013 0.049 0.049 0.014 0.013 0.015 0.013 0.015 0.014 0.041 0.046 0.140 0.136 0.086 0.011 0.033 0.032 0.039 0.024 0.039 0.027 0.017 0.015 0.009 

Car Parts 0.996 1.046 1.046 1.060 1.057 1.029 1.024 1.028 - 1.011 0.983 0.998 0.967 0.941 0.871 1.119 0.880 0.877 1.283 1.309 1.337 - 1.600 -Covid Deaths 0.073 0.070 0.070 0.045 0.048 0.059 0.084 0.079 0.032 0.276 0.043 0.065 0.108 0.918 0.034 0.077 0.038 0.056 0.037 0.064 0.094 0.029 0.133 0.133 Dominick 0.355 0.371 0.371 0.332 0.333 0.338 0.346 0.336 - 0.443 0.327 0.345 0.364 0.327 0.320 0.435 0.313 0.312 0.439 0.483 0.485 - 0.453 0.453 ERCOT Load 0.021 0.023 0.021 0.019 0.016 0.018 0.018 0.017 0.053 0.033 0.022 0.017 0.032 0.024 0.023 0.023 0.020 0.020 0.050 0.122 0.041 0.052 0.037 0.181 ETT (15 Min.) 0.056 0.069 0.051 0.068 0.069 0.064 0.072 0.073 0.088 0.080 0.060 0.054 0.069 0.113 0.075 0.071 0.051 0.053 0.061 0.095 0.079 0.073 0.141 0.121 ETT (Hourly) 0.080 0.083 0.085 0.073 0.081 0.080 0.085 0.080 0.122 0.106 0.084 0.071 0.081 0.142 0.082 0.076 0.081 0.074 0.087 0.132 0.133 0.105 0.122 0.202 Exchange Rate 0.008 0.012 0.015 0.013 0.014 0.013 0.012 0.013 0.015 0.011 0.010 0.010 0.009 0.016 0.011 0.008 0.010 0.011 0.011 0.010 0.010 0.011 0.013 0.015 FRED-MD 0.027 0.040 0.029 0.020 0.022 0.017 0.017 0.022 0.041 0.389 0.043 0.042 0.043 0.058 0.112 0.069 0.057 0.061 0.059 0.055 0.057 0.056 0.122 0.064 Hospital 0.051 0.054 0.054 0.056 0.056 0.057 0.058 0.057 0.066 0.093 0.051 0.070 0.056 0.064 0.053 0.089 0.052 0.050 0.052 0.053 0.055 0.058 0.073 0.087 M1 (Monthly) 0.148 0.130 0.130 0.130 0.128 0.139 0.138 0.131 0.181 0.196 0.145 0.165 0.150 0.150 0.175 0.189 0.189 0.187 0.162 0.162 0.159 0.146 0.191 0.258 M1 (Quarterly) 0.087 0.113 0.113 0.107 0.105 0.103 0.103 0.116 0.115 0.141 0.093 0.078 0.089 0.094 0.122 0.079 0.111 0.085 0.083 0.083 0.082 0.091 0.150 0.130 M1 (Yearly) 0.149 0.145 0.145 0.183 0.181 0.172 0.179 0.204 0.144 0.293 0.145 0.165 0.139 0.168 0.124 0.245 0.198 0.182 0.135 0.142 0.137 0.160 0.209 0.209 M3 (Monthly) 0.089 0.089 0.089 0.096 0.097 0.100 0.099 0.106 0.108 0.155 0.089 0.113 0.099 0.100 0.096 0.121 0.097 0.101 0.094 0.093 0.095 0.102 0.149 0.158 M3 (Quarterly) 0.068 0.075 0.075 0.074 0.076 0.079 0.081 0.078 0.084 0.134 0.073 0.074 0.073 0.072 0.071 0.086 0.076 0.080 0.072 0.069 0.070 0.079 0.101 0.103 M3 (Yearly) 0.121 0.144 0.144 0.151 0.153 0.155 0.159 0.148 0.148 0.192 0.145 0.133 0.122 0.130 0.130 0.143 0.182 0.181 0.144 0.127 0.128 0.162 0.167 0.167 M4 (Quarterly) 0.077 0.062 0.062 0.082 0.083 0.084 0.086 0.087 - 0.132 0.062 0.074 0.080 0.079 0.080 0.085 0.073 0.073 0.079 0.080 0.079 0.082 0.119 0.110 M4 (Yearly) 0.116 0.091 0.091 0.134 0.137 0.136 0.140 0.148 - 0.178 0.091 0.106 0.111 0.109 0.110 0.115 - - 0.114 0.118 0.115 0.130 0.161 0.161 M5 0.559 0.558 0.557 0.587 0.586 0.590 0.595 0.598 - 0.635 0.550 0.597 0.657 0.594 0.560 0.687 0.563 0.560 0.653 0.628 0.636 0.624 1.024 1.024 NN5 (Daily) 0.152 0.158 0.155 0.156 0.161 0.169 0.173 0.162 0.242 0.261 0.152 0.149 0.155 0.154 0.145 0.159 0.149 0.147 0.293 0.264 0.294 0.312 0.425 0.425 NN5 (Weekly) 0.084 0.079 0.079 0.091 0.091 0.090 0.091 0.094 0.092 0.111 0.089 0.081 0.087 0.098 0.086 0.090 0.098 0.114 0.092 0.088 0.090 0.090 0.123 0.123 Tourism (Monthly) 0.079 0.085 0.085 0.100 0.103 0.113 0.109 0.095 0.125 0.213 0.078 0.092 0.092 0.104 0.096 0.101 0.092 0.084 0.083 0.090 0.091 0.093 0.104 0.297 Tourism (Quarterly) 0.076 0.070 0.070 0.061 0.069 0.069 0.074 0.068 0.071 0.202 0.075 0.074 0.072 0.082 0.074 0.080 0.077 0.063 0.075 0.070 0.061 0.098 0.119 0.166 Tourism (Yearly) 0.141 0.163 0.163 0.183 0.207 0.200 0.218 0.194 0.163 0.238 0.178 0.136 0.127 0.179 0.102 0.165 0.139 0.154 0.162 0.159 0.176 0.156 0.209 0.209 Traffic 0.243 0.164 0.213 0.256 0.264 0.263 0.264 0.254 0.287 0.256 0.170 0.246 0.233 0.234 0.264 0.250 0.263 0.270 - 0.557 0.905 - 0.362 0.643 Weather 0.136 0.141 0.133 0.139 0.140 0.143 0.150 0.144 - 0.164 0.127 0.143 0.147 0.152 0.151 0.174 0.143 0.144 0.174 0.214 0.217 0.185 0.217 0.217 Geometric Mean (ZS) 0.585 0.699 0.680 0.634 0.649 0.655 0.667 0.675 0.784 1.134 0.644 0.689 0.745 0.876 0.627 0.762 0.659 0.671 0.720 0.821 0.757 0.751 1.000 1.157 Geometric Mean (All) 0.596 0.673 0.662 0.645 0.660 0.666 0.679 0.686 0.806 1.095 0.626 0.683 0.733 0.842 0.637 0.757 0.670 0.681 0.729 0.836 0.794 0.762 1.000 1.153 

Table 8. MASE and Timing of TimesFM-ICF and TimesFM-FT on the OOD Benchmark. 

Model Total Fine-Tune Time Total Inference Time MASE TimesFM-ICF Not needed 25 min 0.777 TimesFM-FT (FULL) 84 min 28 sec 0.789 167 min 0.794 250 min 0.779 334 min 0.776 418 min 0.776 TimesFM-FT (LP) 29 min 28 sec 0.807 57 min 0.805 85 min 0.802 113 min 0.802 141 min 0.799 in-series examples. We measured the validation MASE error of TimesFM-ICF with the number of in-series examples varying from 0-20, and the total number of in-context examples (including randomly selected examples) varying from 1-50. The resulting heatmap is show in Figure 11. The configuration with smallest validation MASE was 11 in-series examples and 34 total examples. The geometric mean MASE ratio (averaged over 5 runs with different random examples selected) was 0.780 ± .003 (so within a standard error of the MASE value we report in Figure 5). While we leave to future work a more detailed investigation of how best to chose relevant examples to add to the context, the results in this paper show that even simple approaches like random selection and selecting examples from the immediate history are sufficient to obtain accuracy gains with in-context fine-tuning. 18 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

Figure 9. Validation errors during training time suggest that (1) NoPE works better than APE, and (2) NoPE performs on par with other positional encodings that generalize length. 

Figure 10. Scaled MASE (GM) for various in-context example selection strategies for the OOD benchmark: 1) 50 random examples, 2) 45 Random examples and 5 examples from the immediate past history 3) 45 examples chosen at random from similar time-series (according to DTW distance) and 5 examples from the immediate past history 4) 40 Random examples and 10 examples from the immediate past history. The error bars are one standard deviation of the evaluations averaged over 10 random seeds. 

19 In-Context Fine-Tuning for Time-Series Foundation Models 

Table 9. MAE of TimesFM-ICF against other supervised and zero-shot methods on ETT Rolling Window 

Few-shot Zero-shot Task-specific 

TimesFM-ICF Moirai-MV (Large) TimesFM (Base) Moirai (Small) Moirai (Base) Moirai (Large) TimesFM-FT iTransformer TimesNet PatchTST Crossformer DLinear SCINet FEDformer Dataset Horizon ETTh1 96 0.374 0.403 0.386 0.402 0.402 0.398 0.376 0.405 0.402 0.419 0.448 0.400 0.599 0.419 192 0.400 0.432 0.409 0.419 0.429 0.434 0.401 0.436 0.429 0.445 0.474 0.432 0.631 0.448 336 0.414 0.452 0.424 0.429 0.450 0.474 0.416 0.458 0.469 0.466 0.546 0.459 0.659 0.465 720 0.430 0.701 0.448 0.444 0.473 0.568 0.436 0.491 0.500 0.488 0.621 0.516 0.699 0.507 avg 0.405 0.497 0.417 0.424 0.438 0.469 0.407 0.447 0.450 0.454 0.522 0.452 0.647 0.460 ETTh2 96 0.327 0.341 0.337 0.334 0.327 0.325 0.325 0.349 0.374 0.348 0.584 0.387 0.621 0.397 192 0.371 0.389 0.384 0.373 0.374 0.367 0.372 0.400 0.414 0.400 0.656 0.476 0.689 0.439 336 0.393 0.417 0.417 0.393 0.401 0.393 0.403 0.432 0.541 0.433 0.731 0.541 0.744 0.487 720 0.422 0.507 0.446 0.416 0.426 0.421 0.424 0.445 0.657 0.446 0.763 0.657 0.838 0.474 avg 0.378 0.414 0.396 0.379 0.382 0.377 0.381 0.407 0.497 0.407 0.683 0.515 0.723 0.449 ETTm1 96 0.331 0.536 0.342 0.383 0.360 0.363 0.327 0.368 0.375 0.367 0.426 0.372 0.438 0.419 192 0.364 0.588 0.376 0.402 0.379 0.380 0.358 0.391 0.387 0.385 0.451 0.389 0.450 0.441 336 0.387 0.625 0.402 0.416 0.394 0.395 0.381 0.420 0.411 0.410 0.515 0.413 0.485 0.459 720 0.430 0.688 0.444 0.437 0.419 0.417 0.419 0.459 0.450 0.439 0.589 0.453 0.550 0.490 avg 0.378 0.609 0.391 0.410 0.388 0.389 0.371 0.410 0.406 0.400 0.495 0.407 0.481 0.452 ETTm2 96 0.239 0.355 0.260 0.282 0.269 0.260 0.242 0.264 0.267 0.259 0.366 0.292 0.377 0.287 192 0.283 0.418 0.306 0.318 0.303 0.300 0.284 0.309 0.309 0.302 0.492 0.362 0.445 0.328 336 0.322 0.462 0.345 0.355 0.333 0.334 0.321 0.348 0.351 0.343 0.542 0.427 0.591 0.366 720 0.385 0.499 0.404 0.410 0.377 0.386 0.379 0.407 0.403 0.400 1.042 0.522 0.735 0.415 avg 0.307 0.434 0.329 0.341 0.321 0.320 0.306 0.332 0.332 0.326 0.610 0.401 0.537 0.349 

Figure 11. Heatmap of in-context example configurations. The configuration with smallest validation loss has 11 in-series examples and 22 randomly-selected examples. 

20