Title: 25350_Smart_Surrogate_Losses_f.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=5iAtDpkSZQ

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Smart Surrogate Losses for Contextual Stochastic Linear Optimization with Robust Constraints 

Hyungki Im Wyame Benslimane Paul Grigas 

Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA 94720 

{hyungki.im, wyame.benslimane, pgrigas}@berkeley.edu 

# Abstract 

We study an extension of contextual stochastic linear optimization (CSLO) that, in contrast to most of the existing literature, involves inequality constraints that depend on uncertain parameters predicted by a machine learning model. To handle the constraint uncertainty, we use contextual uncertainty sets constructed via methods like conformal prediction. Given a contextual uncertainty set method, we introduce the “Smart Predict-then-Optimize with Robust Constraints” (SPO-RC) loss, a feasibility-sensitive adaptation of the SPO loss that measures decision error of predicted objective parameters. We also introduce a convex surrogate, SPO-RC+, and prove Fisher consistency with SPO-RC. To enhance performance, we train on truncated datasets where true constraint parameters lie within the uncertainty sets, and we correct the induced sample selection bias using importance reweighting techniques. Through experiments on fractional knapsack and alloy production problem instances, we demonstrate that SPO-RC+ effectively handles uncertainty in constraints and that combining truncation with importance reweighting can further improve performance. 

# 1 Introduction 

Large-scale optimization problems are prevalent across various domains, from supply chain man-agement and financial planning to energy systems and transportation. These problems often involve uncertain parameters, which may appear in both the objective function and the constraints. In practice, these unknown parameters are often influenced by contextual data, which can be leveraged to improve decision-making. While integrating contextual data to estimate uncertain parameters in optimization models has gained significant interest in recent years (see surveys by Sadana et al. (2024) and Mandi et al. (2024) and references therein), most of the existing literature focuses on scenarios where these parameters only appear in the objective function. However, in practice, uncertain parameters often arise within the constraints of the optimization problem as well (Wang et al., 2023; Rahimian and Pagnoncelli, 2023). Uncertainty in constraints introduces additional layers of complexity, as the feasibility of solutions with respect to the true parameters is no longer guaranteed. In this paper, we study an extension of contextual stochastic linear optimization (CSLO) where both the objective function and constraints involve uncertain parameters, each of which can be predicted from contextual feature data. We propose a “Smart Predict-then-Optimize with Robust Constraints” (SPO-RC) approach, a framework that provides a reliable method for handling these uncertainties by using robust constraints. Our approach begins by constructing contextual uncertainty sets for the uncertain constraint parameters using existing techniques such as conformal prediction (Romano et al., 2019; Angelopoulos and Bates, 2021; Fontana et al., 2023). We then formulate a contextual robust optimization problem, which provides a safe approximation to a corresponding contextual chance 

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). constrained problem and serves as our mechanism for decision-making. Within this framework, we introduce new cost metrics and their regret forms – the SPO-RC and SPO-RC+ losses. These are direct extensions of the SPO and SPO+ losses, designed to handle changing feasibility sets that vary with contextual data. The SPO-RC loss measures the decision error induced by following a robust predict-then-optimize approach, and the SPO-RC+ loss serves as a convex surrogate. Although we construct uncertainty sets for the constraint parameters, the true parameters may sometimes lie outside these sets, which can potentially lead to infeasible solutions. To address this issue, we truncate data points where the uncertainty sets do not cover the true parameters, focusing our model’s capacity on regions where feasibility is guaranteed. However, the truncation introduces sample selection bias, which we mitigate using importance reweighting techniques, such as Kernel Mean Matching (KMM). Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1. We propose the SPO-RC approach, which formulates a contextual robust optimization problem for decision-making and enables us to learn the objective cost vector in an integrated manner. We propose a convex surrogate called SPO-RC+, and show that Fisher consistency between the proposed SPO-RC and SPO-RC+ losses holds. 2. We introduce learning with truncation to focus on a region where feasibility is guaranteed, and we propose an importance reweighting technique to mitigate sample selection bias. 3. We present numerical results on the fractional knapsack problem and an alloy production problem. These results demonstrate the relative merits of truncation and importance reweight-ing, the robustness of our approach, and the potential for combining our methodology with enhanced scalability techniques like solution caching (Mulamba et al., 2021). 

1.1 Literature review 

Contextual stochastic optimization (CSO) involves making decisions under uncertainty using con-textual information to improve outcomes. Sadana et al. (2024) offers a comprehensive review of the methodologies developed for CSO, categorizing them into three primary approaches. The first approach, “decision rule optimization", centers on learning a mapping from contextual data to de-cisions (Liyanage and Shanthikumar, 2005). Research in this area explores a broad spectrum of methods, including linear decision rules (Ban and Rudin, 2019), reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) based decision rules (Bazier-Matte and Delage, 2020; Bertsimas and Koduri, 2022; Notz and Pibernik, 2022), and non-linear decision rules (Huber et al., 2019; Oroojlooyjadid et al., 2020; Rychener et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). The second approach, “sequential learning and optimization" (SLO), focuses on learning the conditional distribution of outcomes based on contextual data. Decision-making/optimization methods are built on top of the learning methods, and include residual-based methods, (Deng and Sen, 2022; Kannan et al., 2021, 2025, 2024) and importance weighted methods (Bertsimas and Kallus, 2020). To address challenges such as the “optimizer’s curse", robust methodologies have been introduced, including distributionally robust opti-mization (DRO) and regularization techniques (Nguyen et al., 2024; Bertsimas and Van Parys, 2022; Esteban-Pérez and Morales, 2022; Lin et al., 2022). Lastly, the “integrated learning and optimization" (ILO) approach, also known as decision-focused learning, directly trains predictive models with the goal of improving downstream optimization outcomes. This is achieved by minimizing the expected objective value of the solution induced by the prediction models. However, a key challenge is the computational difficulties of training the model by optimizing a loss function that measures decision error. To overcome this challenges, researchers have introduced implicit differentiation methods (Amos and Kolter, 2017; Agrawal et al., 2019; Blondel et al., 2022; McKenzie et al., 2023; Butler and Kwon, 2023) and differentiable surrogate loss functions (Elmachtoub et al., 2020; Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022; Loke et al., 2022; Kallus and Mao, 2023; Estes and Richard, 2023). Our work is particularly related to the SPO framework (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022), as we extend this framework to handle problems with uncertain constraints. As pointed out by Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022), the SPO framework can also be viewed as an extension of structured prediction (Taskar et al., 2005; Nowozin et al., 2011), where the SPO+ loss is an extension of the structured hinge loss. Parmentier (2022) also uses structured prediction to learn a predictor that maps hard instances of optimization problems arising in operations research to easier combinatorial instances. Constructing uncertainty sets conditional on contextual information is important to guarantee the feasibility of the downstream optimization task. Recent work on learning conditional uncertainty sets has explored various approaches, including partitioning methods (Chenreddy et al., 2022), the 2k-nearest ellipsoid method (Ohmori, 2021), differentiable optimization (Wang et al., 2023; Chenreddy and Delage, 2024), and conformal prediction (Johnstone and Cox, 2021; Patel et al., 2024a,b), the latter gaining significant interest due to its distribution-free, model-agnostic characteristics (Sun et al., 2023; Stanton et al., 2023). More recently, end-to-end training methodologies that integrate uncertainty estimation with downstream decision-making objectives have been proposed (Yeh et al., 2024). However, most of these approaches consider uncertainty only in the objective function rather than in the constraints. We introduce a flexible framework that can incorporate multiple methods for constructing uncertainty sets for constraint parameters, with conformal prediction being just one example. 

Notation. Given a distribution D, we denote the marginal distribution of x by Dx. Additionally, we use the superscript notation Dn to represent an i.i.d. dataset of size n sampled from D. We use 

1m to represent the m-dimensional one-vector. 

# 2 Smart predict-then-optimize with robust constraints 

To motivate our methodology, consider the following optimization problem: 

min 

> w∈Rd

E[c⊤w|x] s.t. P(h(w; a) ≤ 0|x) ≥ 1 − α, w ∈ S, (1) where w ∈ Rd represents the decision variables, c ∈ Rd is the uncertain cost parameter, and a ∈ Rm

is the uncertain constraint parameter, with h : Rd × Rm → Rl. The set S ⊆ Rd is compact and convex. Contextual data x ∈ Rp is used to predict c and a, with D denoting the distribution of 

(x, c, a). The objective is risk neutral in c⊤w, while the constraints must be satisfied with probability at least 1 − α. Due to the intractability of the chance-constrained problem, we adopt a common technique in the literature to reformulate/approximate problem (1) as a robust optimization problem by constructing an uncertainty set U(x) such that a ∈ U (x) with probability at least 1 − α. This is not intended as a precise guarantee–it serves merely as a motivation for the robust formulation that follows. There exist various approaches to construct such an uncertainty set U(·) from data, including methods inspired by conformal prediction. With a suitable U(·), we reformulate problem (1) as a robust optimization: 

min 

> w∈Rd

E[c|x]⊤w s.t. h(w; a) ≤ 0 ∀a ∈ U (x), w ∈ S. (2) Assuming that a tractable robust counterpart exists and that a feasible solution can be found, the solution to problem (2) is feasible with probability at least 1 − α. The linearity of expectation simplifies the objective from E[c⊤w|x] to E[c|x]⊤w. Moreover, since the uncertainty set U(x)

depends on x, the feasible set of (2) dynamically changes with x. Note that our methodology, and our proposed SPO-RC and SPO-RC+ losses, build directly on the contextual robust optimization problem (2), a more tractable alternative to problem (1). 

Remark 2.1. For a precise guarantee that the conditional chance constraint P(h(w; a) ≤ 0|x) ≥

1 − α holds for each x, one would require that P(a ∈ U (x) | x) ≥ 1 − α. While achieving this stricter conditional coverage may limit the range of techniques available for constructing U(·), the approach we present is compatible with both marginal and conditional coverage assumptions. 

2.1 Cost metrics 

We focus on developing an integrated approach to learn the cost vector by estimating the conditional expectation E[c|x] within a robust predict-then-optimize pipeline. To achieve this, we introduce a cost metric that measures the quality of solutions derived from our predictions. We consider a hypothesis class F of cost vector prediction models, where each model f : Rp → Rd maps a context vector x to a predicted cost vector ˆc = f (x). Given ˆc and ˆU = U(x), we define the robust optimization problem 

P(ˆc, ˆU) as: 

P(ˆc, ˆU) : min 

> w∈Rd

ˆc⊤w s.t. h(w; a) ≤ 0 ∀a ∈ ˆU, w ∈ S. 

We denote W ∗(ˆc, ˆU) as the optimal solution set of P(ˆc, ˆU), w∗(ˆc, ˆU) as an arbitrary element of 

W ∗(ˆc, ˆU). We also define S := S(x) as the feasible set for P(ˆc, ˆU). Given the predictions ˆc, ˆU

3and the realized cost vector c, we introduce the following notation to record the cost of the decision vector w∗(ˆc, ˆU) with respect to the realized cost vector c:

cost( ˆc, c; ˆU) := c⊤w∗(ˆc, ˆU).

The cost metric above is minimized when the predicted cost vector ˆc exactly matches the true cost vector c. However, since computing the cost metric can be intractable due to the non-differentiable and discontinuous nature of the oracle w∗(·, ˆU), we introduce the tractable cost + metric inspired by the SPO+ loss Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022). 

cost +(ˆc, c; ˆU) := max 

> w∈S

(c − 2ˆc)⊤w + 2 ˆc⊤w∗(c, ˆU)

For a detailed derivation of the cost + metric, we refer the reader to Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022). The cost + metric is convex with respect to ˆc, making it learnable using first-order methods. 

Proposition 2.2. Given c and ˆU, the cost + metric satisfies: 1. cost( ˆc, c; ˆU) ≤ cost +(ˆc, c; ˆU) for all ˆc ∈ Rd,2. cost +(ˆc, c; ˆU) is a convex function of ˆc and 2( w∗(c, ˆU) − w∗(2 ˆc − c, ˆU)) is a subgradient of cost + metric at ˆc.

Given the U(·) and a dataset Dn := {xi, ci, ai}ni=1 , we learn the predictor ˆf by solving: 

ˆf ∈ argmin  

> f∈F

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

cost + (f (xi), ci; U(xi)) .

2.2 Fisher consistency 

We show that many desirable properties from the standard SPO and SPO+ frameworks carry over to our setting. Specifically, we show that the Fisher consistency of the cost( ˆc, c; ˆU) and cost + metric holds (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022). Assuming full knowledge of the data distribution and no restrictions on the hypothesis class, Fisher consistency implies that minimizing the surrogate loss, the cost + metric, also minimizes the true cost metric. This justifies using the cost + metric when it is challenging to directly minimize the cost metric. To formalize this, let f ∗ 

> cost

and f ∗ 

> cost +

be the functions that minimize the expected cost and 

cost + metric, respectively: 

f ∗ 

> cost

= arg min  

> f

E(x,c)∼D x,c [cost ( f (x), c; U(x))] ,f ∗ 

> cost +

= arg min  

> f

E(x,c)∼D x,c [cost + (f (x), c; U(x))] . (3) Under the assumption of full knowledge of D and an unrestricted hypothesis class, we aim to show that: 

f ∗ 

> cost

= f ∗ 

> cost +

= E [c|x] (4) This equality implies that minimizing the cost and cost + metric leads to the same optimal predictor, both resulting in E [c|x], which is the true optimal solution. 

Assumption 2.3. To demonstrate the Fisher consistency of the cost and cost + metrics, we assume the following: 1. Almost surely, W ∗(E[c|x], ˆU) is a singleton for all x ∈ X , where X denotes the domain of the contextual variables. 2. The distribution of c|x is both centrally symmetric about its mean E[c|x] and continuous over the entire space Rd, for all x ∈ X .3. The interior of the feasible region S(x) is non-empty for all x ∈ X .

Theorem 2.4. Under Assumption 2.3, f ∗ 

> cost

and f ∗ 

> cost +

satisfy (4) . Therefore, the cost + metric is Fisher consistent with the cost metric. 

The proof of Theorem 2.4 (and other proofs) is provided in Appendix A. A key aspect of Theorem 2.4 is the assumption that we are working with a well-specified hypothesis class. This ensures that the learned function can capture the true conditional expectation E[c|x] for every x.42.3 SPO-RC and SPO-RC+ loss functions 

A natural extension of the cost metric into a loss function, similar to the SPO approach, is to compare the cost incurred by the predicted solution with the optimal cost achievable in hindsight, assuming perfect knowledge of the true parameter a. We formally introduce the loss function called the SPO Robust Constraint (SPO-RC), defined as follows: 

ℓSPO −RC (ˆc, c; ˆU, a) := 

cost( ˆc, c; ˆU) − c⊤w∗(c, δ a), if a ∈ ˆU,

∆S (C), otherwise ,

where δa := {˜a : ˜ a = a} is a singleton uncertainty set. The function ∆S (C) provides an upper bound on the maximum possible difference in objective value over all solutions in S throughout the compact vector space C. It is defined as: 

∆S (C) := sup 

> c∈C



max  

> w∈S

c⊤w − min  

> w∈S

c⊤w



.

The term c⊤w∗(c, δ a) represents the pure optimal cost, which is achievable in hindsight with perfect knowledge of a. Specifically, when a /∈ ˆU, the predicted solution w∗(ˆc, ˆU) might outperform the optimal solution in hindsight, resulting in a negative loss. To ensure that the loss remains nonnegative, we set it to the upper bound ∆S (C) in this case. The definition of the SPO-RC loss can be naturally extended to the SPO-RC+ loss function as follows: 

ℓSPO −RC + (ˆc, c; ˆU, a) := cost +(ˆc, c; ˆU) − c⊤w∗(c, δ a).

Although the SPO-RC + loss function is continuous and convex, it serves only as a valid upper bound for the SPO-RC loss when a ∈ ˆU, as the SPO-RC loss is defined as ∆S (C) when a /∈ ˆU. Therefore, when using the SPO-RC+ loss for training, we must truncate the data to regions where a ∈ ˆU to ensure that the loss function serves as a valid upper bound. 

Remark 2.5. Theorem 2.4 assumes that the hypothesis class F is well specified, which means 

E [c|x] ∈ F , which is rarely true in practice. Therefore, it can be advantageous to focus the predictive capacity of the model on regions where the feasibility of the solution is guaranteed (i.e., when a ∈ ˆU). 

# 3 SPO-RC+ with data truncation and importance reweighting 

In this section, we introduce our main SPO-RC+ training procedure with data truncation to remove infeasible data points and importance reweighting to correct for the bias that this introduces. 

3.1 Conformal prediction 

We first introduce conformal prediction as a technique to construct the uncertainty set ˆU for the parameter a based on the context x. Conformal prediction provides prediction sets that contain the true outcome with a specified probability 1 − α, independent of the data distribution and model assumptions. Specifically, we use the split conformal prediction approach, which begins by splitting the data into two sets: a training set Dnp 

> x,a

and a calibration set Dnc

> x,a

. The training set is used to fit a predictive model ˆg that estimates a from x. We then compute non-conformity scores in the calibration set to measure the discrepancy between predicted and actual values. For example, using the ℓ2 norm, the non-conformity score si for a calibration point ( xi, ai) is calculated as si = ∥ai − ˆg(xi)∥2. These scores are used to determine a threshold Q1−α, the ⌈ (nc+1)(1 −α) 

> nc

⌉ quantile of the set {si}i∈D nc  

> x,a

.This threshold defines the uncertainty set for new observations: 

U(x) = {˜a : ∥˜a − ˆg(x)∥2 ≤ Q1−α}.

The following proposition shows that the uncertainty set obtained via split conformal prediction achieves the desired marginal coverage. 

Proposition 3.1. Suppose the calibration dataset Dnc 

> x,a

and the new observation (xtest , atest ) are i.i.d. samples from Dx,a and U is constructed using split conformal prediction. Then, we have 

P(atest ∈ U (xtest )) ≥ 1 − α. 

This result relies on the exchangeability of the calibration dataset and the new observation, which holds when they are i.i.d. samples. Importantly, Proposition 3.1 is true for any distribution D and any model g, regardless of its form or assumptions. 53.2 Importance reweighting 

In Section 2.3, we introduced the SPO-RC and SPO-RC+ loss functions and suggested learning with truncated samples where a ∈ ˆU. However, the truncation causes a distribution shift, making it challenging to learn the true optimal solution E[c|x]. Therefore, we use importance reweighting to correct the truncated distribution ˜D to the true distribution D by reweighting the data points. Suppose U is constructed using the split conformal prediction method. We consider learning from the truncated distribution ˜D, which satisfies P ˜D (x, a, c) ∝ PD (x, a, c)1(a ∈ U (x)) , where 1(·) is the indicator function. Notice that the minimizers f ∗ 

> cost

and f ∗ 

> cost +

in (3) remain unchanged even when replacing the cost/ cost + metrics with the SPO-RC/SPO-RC+ loss functions. Therefore, we choose to use the minimizers derived from the cost metrics, allowing us to focus on the marginal distributions 

˜Dx,c and Dx,c. The difference between these marginal distributions can be decomposed into two components: (1) the difference in PD (x) versus P ˜D (x), and (2) the difference in PD (c|x) versus 

P ˜D (c|x). However, under the assumption that c and a are conditionally independent given x, we find that PD (c|x) and P ˜D (c|x) are the same. 

Assumption 3.2. We assume that conditioned on x, c and a are independent. That is, 

PD (c, a|x) = PD (c|x)PD (a|x) ∀x ∈ X .

Lemma 3.3. Under Assumption 3.2, the conditional distributions of c given x in the original distribution D and the truncated distribution ˜D are the same. That is, 

PD (c|x) = P ˜D (c|x), ∀x ∈ X .

Lemma 3.3 relies on the fact that the truncation leading to ˜D depends only on x and a, and not directly on c. Consequently, the only relevant aspect is the marginal distribution of x in D and ˜D,reducing the problem to a simplified covariate shift problem. 

E(x,c)∼D x,c [cost ( f (x), c; U(x))] = E(x,c)∼ ˜Dx,c

 PD (x, c)

P ˜D (x, c) cost ( f (x), c; U(x)) 



=

E(x,c)∼ ˜Dx,c

 PD (x)

P ˜D (x) cost ( f (x), c; U(x)) 



= E(x,c)∼ ˜Dx,c [β(x)cost ( f (x), c; U(x))] ,

where β(x) = PD (x)   

> P˜D(x)

is a importance weight. This relationship implies that, with proper importance weights, we can still learn the true optimal predictor E[c|x] despite the truncation. However, since the true underlying distributions D and ˜D are unknown, we estimate β using an empirical importance weighting method. While we use Kernel Mean Matching (KMM) (Huang et al., 2006) to estimate 

β, any other importance weight estimating methods such as logistic regression-based classifiers (Bickel et al., 2009) and adversarial learning approaches (Ganin et al., 2016) can be used. Given a truncated dataset ˜Dns 

> x,c

= {(˜ xi, ˜ci)}ns 

> i=1

and a target dataset Dnt 

> x,c

= {(xi, ci)}nt

> i=1

, KMM estimates the importance weight vector ˆβ ∈ Rns by solving: 

min 

> β

12 β⊤Kβ − κ⊤β s.t. 

> ns

X

> i=1

βi − ns ≤ nsϵ, 0 ≤ βi ≤ B ∀i ∈ { 1, · · · , n s}, (5) where K ∈ Rns×ns is a kernel matrix with entries Kij = k(˜ xi, ˜xj ), κ ∈ Rns is a vector with entries 

κi = ns

> nt

Pnt 

> j=1

k(˜ xi, xj ) and k is a universal kernel. The parameters B and ϵ control the range of the importance weights and the tolerance to match the distributions, respectively. We present our learning algorithm within the SPO-RC framework in Algorithm 1. We use KMM to compute the importance reweighting vector ˆβ and the estimator ˆf is then obtained by minimizing a weighted empirical cost + over the truncated data. To implement our approach, we partition the data into four distinct sets: two sets are allocated for split conformal prediction, while the other two are used for training and KMM. Notably, the dataset reserved for conformal prediction can also serve as the target dataset for KMM, thereby simplifying the data preparation process. Finally, we note that Appendix B includes generalization bounds that extend results of El Balghiti et al. (2023) to account for our context-dependent loss function structure and the fact that we may train on importance-reweighted truncated data. 6Algorithm 1: SPO-RC+ with Data Truncation and Importance Reweighting 

Input: ˆU, Dn1 

> 1

:= {(x1 

> i

, c1 

> i

, a1 

> i

)}n1

> i=1

, Dnt 

> 2

:= {(x2 

> i

, c2 

> i

, a2 

> i

)}nt

> i=1

;Initialize I = {} ;

for i = 1 to n1 do if a1 

> i

∈ ˆU(x1 

> i

) then 

I ← I ∪ { i};Define Source data set ˜DI := {(x1 

> i

, c1 

> i

, a1 

> i

)}i∈I ;

ˆβ ← Solve (5) with source dataset ˜DI and target dataset Dnt 

> 2

;

ˆf ← min  

> f∈F

P  

> i∈I
> ˆβ(x1
> i)
> |I|

cost +



f (x1 

> i

), c1 

> i

; ˆU(x1 

> i

)



;Return ˆf ;

(a) Cost Curves of c1 and c2 (b) SPO-RC+ Model on DT (c) SPO-RC+ Model on DIR 

Figure 1: Visualization of the importance reweighting toy example 

# 4 Numerical experiments 

In this section, we present computational results from synthetic data on multiple applications. Unless otherwise specified, the ℓ2-norm is used as the conformal prediction score function in most experi-ments. Throughout, models are trained on three different datasets: the original dataset DO, a truncated dataset DT where instances with ai /∈ U (xi) are removed, and an importance-reweighted dataset 

DIR to adjust for the truncation bias. For KMM, we set the constant B = 1000 and ϵ = √m−1√m ,where m is the size of the truncated dataset. Although we choose a large value for B, in most cases the probability ratio did not exceed 20. A Gaussian kernel k(xi, xj ) = exp  −∥ xi − xj ∥22

 is used. While KMM introduces some computational overhead, particularly for very large m, the number of samples in our experiments is medium to moderately large ( ≈ 5000 samples), and the primary computational cost comes from training the model under our proposed loss function, rather than from reweighting. The computation of KMM weights is relatively minor (about 1–4 seconds for 

m = 1000 ). Accordingly, our discussion on scalability primarily concerns training time with the SPO-RC+ loss. Given a testing dataset Zn = {xi, ci, ai}ni=1 , we assess model performance using the normalized metric: 

NormSPORCTest( Zn) := 

Pni=1 ℓSPO −RC (ˆci, ci; U(xi), ai)

Pni=1 |c⊤ 

> i

w∗(ci, δ ai )| .

If the induced solution w∗(ˆ ci, U(xi)) is infeasible, we set the loss ℓSPO −RC + (ˆci, ci; U(xi), ai) to the numerator value |c⊤ 

> i

w∗(ci, δ ai )|, thereby penalizing infeasibility. Our code is built on the open source software package PyEPO (Tang and Khalil, 2024). 

Toy examples. To illustrate the effectiveness of importance reweighting, we present a simple toy example with two items. The value of each item is a function of the context x, as depicted in Figure 1a. Our goal is to predict which of the two items has the higher value using a linear regression model for each item. Suppose we randomly remove 30% of the data points where |x| < 0.5, simulating a 7Figure 2: Out-of-sample test set (size 3000) NormSPORCTest values of linear models with MSE and SPO-RC+ loss functions, as well as random forests, on ℓ2 norm fractional knapsack instances. Table 1: Percentage of infeasible solutions of fractional knapsack instances ( ℓ2 norm) for different methods on a test set (size 3000), with deg c = 4 .

Models PTO MSE ( DIR ) RF ( DIR ) SPO-RC+ ( DIR )Infeasibility (%) 45.00 0.02 0.02 0.02 truncation scenario. Figure 1b illustrates the resulting case where the linear models are trained using the truncated dataset DT. Due to truncation, the predicted value for item 1 consistently exceeds the predicted value for item 2 across all x, leading to incorrect selection of item 2 for certain values of x.This truncation effect, however, can be mitigated by training the models on an importance reweighted dataset DIR . As shown in Figure 1c, the learned decision boundary (indicated by the vertical red dotted line) closely aligns with the true optimal decision boundary (indicated by the vertical green dotted line), highlighting the effectiveness of the importance reweighting approach. Additional toy examples and detailed explanations can be found in Appendix C.1. 

Fractional knapsack problem using ℓ2 conformity score. We consider the fractional knapsack problem, with robust formulation: 

max 

> w∈Rd

c⊤w s.t. a⊤w ≤ b ∀a ∈ U (x), 1⊤ 

> d

w = 1 , w ∈ [0 , 1] d,

where ˆU(x) = {˜a : ∥˜a − ˆa∥2 ≤ Q1−α} is constructed using conformal prediction with ℓ2-norm, and 

ˆa = ˆ g(x) is the estimated weight vector from the predictor ˆg. This problem can be reformulated as a second-order cone program (SOCP). We generate synthetic data with polynomial kernel models to describe the dependencies of c and a on x; a detailed explanation of the data generation and model description can be found in Appendix C.2. Figure 2 compares the out-of-sample NormSPORCTest performance of three different models, including linear models with either MSE or SPO-RC+ loss functions and random forest models, trained on three datasets DO, DT, and DIR , across varying levels of the polynomial degree dictating the complexity of the generated cost and constraint vectors. We observe that linear models trained with the SPO-RC+ loss have comparable performance to the non-parametric random forest model, and both outperform the linear regression model (MSE). (In this experiment only, we include random forests to illustrate the use of both parametric and nonparametric methods in our robust constraints setting. In later experiments, we focus on linear models only to better isolate and evaluate our core contributions.) In terms of dataset variations, models trained on DIR yield better results in some cases, especially when the training size is small (n = 1000) . Specifically, we observe that SPO-RC+ on DIR 

outperforms SPO-RC+ on DT in nearly every scenario. Table 1 presents the percentage of infeasible solutions for each model. The PTO model refers to the predict-then-optimize method, which uses the predicted ˆa directly without an uncertainty set. Table 1 shows that all methods that solve the robust constraint problem yield almost no infeasible solutions, while almost half of the solutions from the PTO approach are infeasible. 

Fractional knapsack problem using ℓ1 conformity score. We consider the fractional knapsack problem with ˆU(x) constructed using conformal prediction with ℓ1-norm. The resulting robust 8counterpart, constructed using the estimated ˆa = ˆ g(x) and ˆU(x) = {˜a : ∥˜a − ˆa∥1 ≤ Q1−α}, can be reformulated as a linear program (LP). Figure 3a compares the out-of-sample NormSPORCTest performance of different linear models using either MSE or SPO-RC+ loss functions and across the datasets DO, DT, and DIR . We observe that for small values of the polynomial degree, the parameter dictating the complexity of the generated cost and constraint vectors, the models trained with MSE slightly outperform those trained with SPO-RC+. However, the performance differences remain marginal in this regime. As expected by observations in the literature (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022), as the complexity of the relationship between features and cost vectors increases, the SPO-RC+ models consistently outperform the MSE models. We also use this example to demonstrate how our methodology can be effectively combined with techniques to enhance scalability. The main scalability challenge of our method arises primarily during model training, particularly when using the SPO-RC+ loss function. As shown in Table 2, which reports the training times of our method with both MSE and SPO-RC+ losses on small and large datasets, the scalability of our approach is closely tied to the choice of the surrogate training loss employed. Consequently, our method directly benefits from any scalability improvements developed for decision-focused learning (DFL) methods. To demonstrate this, we adopt a randomized solution caching strategy inspired by Mulamba et al. (2021), who proposed caching solutions to reduce the number of solver calls during training. Specifically, in our case, each iteration of training requires evaluating the SPO-RC+ loss (at least once) and calculating a corresponding gradient by solving a robust optimization problem. For each data point, which has its own uncertainty set and corresponding robust problem, we maintain a cache of past solutions and, at every iteration, whenever needed, we either return the best solution from the cache or re-solve the problem. As the fraction of time that we perform a fresh re-solve gets smaller, Figures 3c and 3d demonstrate that the quality of models produced by the SPO-RC+ loss, across all three datasets, only slightly degrades, while the overall training time dramatically improves. Table 2: Training time comparison (in seconds) for models using MSE and SPO-RC+ on the knapsack and alloy production problem. Results are reported for two instance sizes ( n = 5 and n = 10 ), each trained on datasets of 1000 and 5000 training samples. 

Method MSE (DIR ) MSE (DIR ) SPO-RC+ (DIR ) SPO-RC+ (DIR )

Training data 1000 5000 1000 5000 Knapsack (n=5) 6.86 32.90 30.76 157.96 Knapsack (n=10) 8.67 35.65 44.36 214.60 Alloy production (n=5) 5.73 24.01 54.81 280.58 Alloy production (n=10) 6.98 33.24 95.04 427.95    

> (a) Knapsack ( ℓ1)(b) Alloy production (c) Knapsack ( ℓ1)(d) Knapsack ( ℓ1)

Figure 3: Performance comparison across different tasks and evaluation criteria: (a)–(b) report out-of-sample test set (size 3000) NormSPORCTest performance under varying cost complexities for the fractional knapsack and alloy production problems, respectively. (c)–(d) evaluate the impact of the caching strategy in the knapsack problem with ℓ1-norm costs, using out-of-sample NormSPORCTest and training time as metrics. 

Alloy production problem (Hu et al. (2023)). In an alloy production process, a plant must produce a target alloy that requires a specified minimum quantity of different metals. Suppliers provide ores that contains a certain amount of the m metals required for production. Since the true chemical 9compositions of the ores are uncertain, we formulate the production problem as a robust covering LP: 

min 

> w∈Rd

c⊤w s.t. a⊤ 

> j

w ≥ hj ∀aj ∈ U j (x), j = 1 , · · · , m, w ≥ 0,

where ci is the cost per unit of ore from each supplier i, hj is the required quantity of metal j and 

aj ∈ Rm is the concentration vector of metal j, where each entry represents the concentration of metal j in the ore across different suppliers. These concentrations may be uncertain but could be predicted based on certain chemical characteristics. We build an independent prediction model for each constraint, each using conformal prediction with ℓ2 score, leading to an SOCP reformulation of the robust problem above. A detailed explanation of the data generation process and model description can be found in Appendix C.3. We run our experiments on a brass production scenario where two metals (Zinc and Copper) are required. Training times are reported in Table 2. The results in Figure 3b show a similar pattern as Figure 3a for the knapsack problem, where the MSE and SPO-RC+ models perform comparably for simpler cost functions, while SPO-RC+ consistently outperforms MSE as the complexity of the cost vector increases. 

# 5 Conclusion and future directions 

We propose the SPO-RC framework to learn the cost predictor in an integrated way while ensuring solution feasibility. The SPO-RC loss plays a central role by penalizing uncertainty sets ˆU that are either overly conservative or fail to capture the true parameters. While effective, the current approach has two key limitations: it applies only to problems with a linear objective, and it relies on a two-step procedure that learns the uncertainty set independently of the cost coefficients. Developing a related method to address nonlinear objectives and/or a fully joint learning procedure are promising directions for future work. Another potential direction for future work involves utilizing contextual uncertainty sets and robust constraints within other structured prediction applications, such as the work of Parmentier (2022) on learning simpler approximations of difficult variants of well-known optimization problems. 

# Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by NSF AI Institute for Advances in Optimization Award 2112533. 

# References 

Agrawal, A., Amos, B., Barratt, S., Boyd, S., Diamond, S., and Kolter, J. Z. (2019). Differentiable convex optimization layers. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32. Amos, B. and Kolter, J. Z. (2017). Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks. In International conference on machine learning , pages 136–145. PMLR. Angelopoulos, A. N. and Bates, S. (2021). A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511 .Ban, G.-Y. and Rudin, C. (2019). The big data newsvendor: Practical insights from machine learning. 

Operations Research , 67(1):90–108. Bartlett, P. L. and Mendelson, S. (2002). Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3(Nov):463–482. Bazier-Matte, T. and Delage, E. (2020). Generalization bounds for regularized portfolio selection with market side information. INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research , 58(2):374–401. Bertsimas, D. and Kallus, N. (2020). From predictive to prescriptive analytics. Management Science ,66(3):1025–1044. Bertsimas, D. and Koduri, N. (2022). Data-driven optimization: A reproducing kernel hilbert space approach. Operations Research , 70(1):454–471. 10 Bertsimas, D. and Van Parys, B. (2022). Bootstrap robust prescriptive analytics. Mathematical Programming , 195(1):39–78. Bickel, S., Brückner, M., and Scheffer, T. (2009). Discriminative learning under covariate shift. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 10(75):2137–2155. Blondel, M., Berthet, Q., Cuturi, M., Frostig, R., Hoyer, S., Llinares-López, F., Pedregosa, F., and Vert, J.-P. (2022). Efficient and modular implicit differentiation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:5230–5242. Butler, A. and Kwon, R. H. (2023). Efficient differentiable quadratic programming layers: an admm approach. Computational Optimization and Applications , 84(2):449–476. Chen, W., Tanneau, M., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2023). End-to-end feasible optimization proxies for large-scale economic dispatch. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems .Chenreddy, A. R., Bandi, N., and Delage, E. (2022). Data-driven conditional robust optimization. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:9525–9537. Chenreddy, A. R. and Delage, E. (2024). End-to-end conditional robust optimization. In Proceedings of the Fortieth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , pages 736–748. Deng, Y. and Sen, S. (2022). Predictive stochastic programming. Computational Management Science , 19(1):65–98. El Balghiti, O., Elmachtoub, A. N., Grigas, P., and Tewari, A. (2023). Generalization bounds in the predict-then-optimize framework. Mathematics of Operations Research , 48(4):2043–2065. Elmachtoub, A. N. and Grigas, P. (2022). Smart “predict, then optimize”. Management Science ,68(1):9–26. Elmachtoub, A. N., Liang, J. C. N., and McNellis, R. (2020). Decision trees for decision-making under the predict-then-optimize framework. In International conference on machine learning ,pages 2858–2867. PMLR. Esteban-Pérez, A. and Morales, J. M. (2022). Distributionally robust stochastic programs with side information based on trimmings. Mathematical Programming , 195(1):1069–1105. Estes, A. S. and Richard, J.-P. P. (2023). Smart predict-then-optimize for two-stage linear programs with side information. INFORMS Journal on Optimization , 5(3):295–320. Fontana, M., Zeni, G., and Vantini, S. (2023). Conformal prediction: a unified review of theory and new challenges. Bernoulli , 29(1):1–23. Ganin, Y., Ustinova, E., Ajakan, H., Germain, P., Larochelle, H., Laviolette, F., March, M., and Lempitsky, V. (2016). Domain-adversarial training of neural networks. Journal of machine learning research , 17(59):1–35. Hu, X., Lee, J. C., and Lee, J. H. (2023). Predict+ optimize for packing and covering lps with unknown parameters in constraints. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 37, pages 3987–3995. Huang, J., Gretton, A., Borgwardt, K., Schölkopf, B., and Smola, A. (2006). Correcting sample selection bias by unlabeled data. Advances in neural information processing systems , 19. Huber, J., Müller, S., Fleischmann, M., and Stuckenschmidt, H. (2019). A data-driven newsvendor problem: From data to decision. European Journal of Operational Research , 278(3):904–915. Johnstone, C. and Cox, B. (2021). Conformal uncertainty sets for robust optimization. In Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction and Applications , pages 72–90. PMLR. Kallus, N. and Mao, X. (2023). Stochastic optimization forests. Management Science , 69(4):1975– 1994. 11 Kannan, R., Bayraksan, G., and Luedtke, J. (2021). Heteroscedasticity-aware residuals-based contextual stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03139 .Kannan, R., Bayraksan, G., and Luedtke, J. R. (2024). Residuals-based distributionally robust optimization with covariate information. Mathematical Programming , 207(1):369–425. Kannan, R., Bayraksan, G., and Luedtke, J. R. (2025). Data-driven sample average approximation with covariate information. Operations Research .Lin, S., Chen, Y., Li, Y., and Shen, Z.-J. M. (2022). Data-driven newsvendor problems regularized by a profit risk constraint. Production and Operations Management , 31(4):1630–1644. Liyanage, L. H. and Shanthikumar, J. G. (2005). A practical inventory control policy using operational statistics. Operations research letters , 33(4):341–348. Loke, G. G., Tang, Q., and Xiao, Y. (2022). Decision-driven regularization: A blended model for predict-then-optimize. Available at SSRN 3623006 .Mandi, J., Kotary, J., Berden, S., Mulamba, M., Bucarey, V., Guns, T., and Fioretto, F. (2024). Decision-focused learning: Foundations, state of the art, benchmark and future opportunities. 

Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 80:1623–1701. McKenzie, D., Fung, S. W., and Heaton, H. (2023). Faster predict-and-optimize with three-operator splitting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13395 .Mulamba, M., Mandi, J., Diligenti, M., Lombardi, M., Bucarey, V., Guns, T., et al. (2021). Contrastive losses and solution caching for predict-and-optimize. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 2833–2840. ijcai. org. Nguyen, V. A., Zhang, F., Wang, S., Blanchet, J., Delage, E., and Ye, Y. (2024). Robustifying conditional portfolio decisions via optimal transport. Operations Research .Notz, P. M. and Pibernik, R. (2022). Prescriptive analytics for flexible capacity management. 

Management Science , 68(3):1756–1775. Nowozin, S., Lampert, C. H., et al. (2011). Structured learning and prediction in computer vision. 

Foundations and Trends® in Computer Graphics and Vision , 6(3–4):185–365. Ohmori, S. (2021). A predictive prescription using minimum volume k-nearest neighbor enclosing ellipsoid and robust optimization. Mathematics , 9(2):119. Oroojlooyjadid, A., Snyder, L. V., and Takáˇ c, M. (2020). Applying deep learning to the newsvendor problem. IISE Transactions , 52(4):444–463. Parmentier, A. (2022). Learning to approximate industrial problems by operations research classic problems. Operations Research , 70(1):606–623. Patel, Y., Rayan, S., and Tewari, A. (2024a). Conformal robust control of linear systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16250 .Patel, Y. P., Rayan, S., and Tewari, A. (2024b). Conformal contextual robust optimization. In 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 2485–2493. PMLR. Rahimian, H. and Pagnoncelli, B. (2023). Data-driven approximation of contextual chance-constrained stochastic programs. SIAM Journal on Optimization , 33(3):2248–2274. Romano, Y., Patterson, E., and Candes, E. (2019). Conformalized quantile regression. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32. Rychener, Y., Kuhn, D., and Sutter, T. (2023). End-to-end learning for stochastic optimization: A bayesian perspective. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 29455–29472. PMLR. Sadana, U., Chenreddy, A., Delage, E., Forel, A., Frejinger, E., and Vidal, T. (2024). A survey of contextual optimization methods for decision-making under uncertainty. European Journal of Operational Research .12 Stanton, S., Maddox, W., and Wilson, A. G. (2023). Bayesian optimization with conformal prediction sets. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 959–986. PMLR. Sun, C., Liu, L., and Li, X. (2023). Predict-then-calibrate: A new perspective of robust contextual lp. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:17713–17741. Tang, B. and Khalil, E. B. (2024). Pyepo: A pytorch-based end-to-end predict-then-optimize library for linear and integer programming. Mathematical Programming Computation , pages 1–39. Taskar, B., Chatalbashev, V., Koller, D., and Guestrin, C. (2005). Learning structured prediction models: A large margin approach. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning , pages 896–903. Wang, I., Becker, C., Van Parys, B., and Stellato, B. (2023). Learning decision-focused uncertainty sets in robust optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19225 .Yeh, C., Christianson, N., Wu, A., Wierman, A., and Yue, Y. (2024). End-to-end conformal calibration for optimization under uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20534 .Zhang, Y., Liu, J., and Zhao, X. (2023). Data-driven piecewise affine decision rules for stochastic programming with covariate information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13646 .13 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We clearly and accurately stated our paper’s contributions and scope in both the abstract and introduction. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We mentioned the limitations of our approach in the conclusion. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] 14 Justification: Our paper provides the full set of assumptions in Section 2.2 and complete proofs in Appendix A. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The main experimental results are presented in Section 4, with additional implementation details provided in Appendix C. The code is included in the supplementary material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

15 Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The code is included in the supplementary material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The experiments implementation details are provided in Appendix C. The code is included in the supplementary material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All experiments are run with five different random seeds. We report the mean and standard deviation, and include error bars in plots where applicable to reflect the variability across runs. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. 16 • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The computer resources that we used are reported in the paper/supplementary material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper conforms, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: There is no societal impact of the work performed in this paper. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. 17 • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper poses no such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The data and code used in the paper are properly credited and cited. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. 18 • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not release new assets. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. 19 • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: LLMs were only used for minor editing and language refinement purposes. The core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 20 A Missing proofs 

A.1 Proof of Theorem 2.4 

Our proof follows similar steps to those in Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022). Since the hypothesis class 

F is unrestricted, we can optimize the function values f (x) individually for each x ∈ X . Therefore, solving the problems 

f ∗ 

> cost

∈ arg min  

> f

E(x,c)∼D x,c [cost ( f (x), c; U(x))] ,f ∗ 

> cost +

∈ arg min  

> f

E(x,c)∼D x,c [cost + (f (x), c; U(x))] ,

is equivalent to optimizing each f (x) separately. Consequently, for the remainder of the proof, we fix 

x to x0, and also ˆU0 := U(x0), and consider only the conditional distribution of c. We define the risks associated with the cost and cost metrics as: 

Rcost (ˆc) := Ec

h

cost 



ˆc, c; ˆU0

i 

,Rcost + (ˆc) := Ec

h

cost +



ˆc, c; ˆU0

i 

,

(6) where the Ec denotes the expectation over c. Let us define ¯c := Ec [c|x0]. We first list the propositions needed to complete the proof of Theorem 2.4. 

Proposition A.1 (Proposition 5 of Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022)) . If a cost vector c∗ is a minimizer of Rcost (·), then W ∗(c∗, ˆU0) ⊆ W ∗(¯ c, ˆU0). On the other hand, if c∗ is a cost vector such that 

W ∗(c∗, ˆU0) is a singleton and W ∗(c∗, ˆU0) ⊆ W ∗(¯ c, ˆU0), then c∗ is a minimizer of Rcost (·).

Proposition A.2 (Proposition 6 of Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022)) . Under Assumption 2.3, ¯c is the unique minimizer of Rcost + (·).

Since we have fixed x to x0, the uncertainty set ˆU0 is also fixed. Therefore, Propositions A.1 and A.2 reduce to those presented in Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022), and their proofs follow accordingly. Importantly, these propositions hold true when the constructed uncertainty set satisfies Assumption 2.3, regardless of whether the true parameter a lies within ˆU0 or not. This means we do not need to be concerned about the quality of ˆU0 to guarantee consistency when learning with the cost + metric or SPO-RC+ loss function. (Indeed, recall the MSE loss will also guarantee consistency.) However, since we do not know the true distribution D and certain assumptions such as having a well-defined hypothesis class F often do not hold, this motivates us to focus on the region where feasibility is guaranteed and subsequently cost + and SPO-RC+ yield valid upper bounds, as discussed in our main paper. We complete the proof of Theorem 2.4 using the above propositions. 

Proof. Let x0 ∈ X be given and let ˆU0 = U(x0). By Proposition A.2, the expected cost vector 

E[c|x0] is the unique minimizer of Rcost + (·). That is, f ∗ 

> cost +

(x0) is unique and f ∗ 

> cost +

(x0) = 

E[c|x0]. Under Assumption 2.3, the optimal solution set W ∗(E[c|x0], ˆU0) is a singleton. Applying Proposition A.1, we conclude that E[c|x0] is a minimizer of Rcost (·). Since this holds for every 

x ∈ X , we have that almost surely f ∗ 

> cost +

is unique, f ∗ 

> cost +

= E[c|x], and f ∗ 

> cost +

also minimizes 

E(x,c)∼D x,c [cost ( f (x), c; U(x))] . This shows the Fisher consistency between the cost and cost +

metrics. Moreover, because the f ∗ 

> cost

and f ∗ 

> cost +

remain the same when using SPO-RC and SPO-RC+ loss functions, respectively, this implies Fisher consistency between the SPO-RC and SPO-RC+ loss functions as well. 

A.2 Proof of Lemma 3.3 

Proof. The truncated distribution ˜D satisfies P ˜D (x, a, c) ∝ PD (x, a, c)1(a ∈ U (x)) , where 1(·) is the indicator function. Therefore, we have 

P ˜D (x, a, c) ∝ PD (x, a, c)1(a ∈ U (x)) = PD (c|x, a)PD (x, a)1(a ∈ U (x)) = PD (c|x, a)P ˜D (x, a)= PD (c|x)P ˜D (x, a) (by Assumption 3.2). 21 To find the marginal distribution P ˜D (x, c), we sum over all possible a:

P ˜D (x, c) = P ˜D (c|x)P ˜D (x)

∝ PD (c|x)P ˜D (x).

Dividing both sides by P ˜D (x) gives P ˜D (c|x) = PD (c|x).

# B Extended theoretical results 

B.1 Generalization bound 

In this section, we present additional theoretical results, specifically generalization bounds for the cost metric. This extends the generalization bounds presented in El Balghiti et al. (2023) to accommodate context-dependent feasibility sets. We define the population risk of a function f with respect to the 

cost metric as 

RD (f ) := E(x,c)∼D x,c [cost ( f (x), c; U(x))] ,

and denote its empirical risk over n samples collected in a dataset Dn as 

ˆRn 

> D

(f ) := 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

cost ( f (xi), ci; U(xi)) .

The multivariate Rademacher complexity Rn

> cost

(F) (Bertsimas and Kallus, 2020) of the hypothesis class F with respect to the cost metric is defined as: 

Rn

> cost

(F) := Ex,cEσ

"

sup  

> f∈F

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

σicost ( f (xi), ci; U(xi)) 

#

,

where σi are i.i.d Rademacher random variables for i = 1 , · · · , n . We denote the quantity ΩS (C) as an upper bound on the maximum possible objective value over all solutions in S across the entire space C. Specifically, it is given by: 

ΩS (C) := sup 

> c∈C



max  

> w∈S

c⊤w



.

By applying the cost metric to the renowned result from Bartlett and Mendelson (2002), we obtain the following theorem. 

Theorem B.1 (Theorem from (Bartlett and Mendelson, 2002)) . Let F be a hypothesis class and let 

δ > 0. The following inequality holds with probability at least 1 − δ over an i.i.d. dataset Dn for all 

f ∈ F :

RD (f ) ≤ ˆRn 

> D

(f ) + 2 Rn

> cost

(F) + Ω S (C)

r log(1 /δ )2n . (7) In particular, when the hypothesis class F consist of linear functions, we can further bound the Rademacher complexity Rn

> cost

(F) in terms of the sample size n and other relevant quantities. We define S := {S (x) : x ∈ X } as the collection of all possible feasible sets and introduce the upper bound on their radius ρ(S) := max  

> S∈ S

max  

> w∈S

∥w∥2 to characterize the size of these sets. 

Proposition B.2 (Corollary 3 of El Balghiti et al. (2023)) . If Flin := {x → Bx |B ∈ Rd×p} is the linear hypothesis class, then we have 

Rn

> cost

(Flin ) ≤ 2dΩS (C)

r 2p log (2 nρ (S)d)

n + O

 1

n



.

Notice that the extension can be easily made by adjusting the definition of ρ(S), which characterizes the size of the feasible sets. By incorporating the Rademacher complexity bound from Proposition B.2 into (7), we obtain a generalization bound for the linear hypothesis class in our framework. In addition to ensuring consistency when truncating, importance reweighting allows us to extend the generalization bounds presented in Theorem B.1. The following lemma provides a bound on the difference between the empirical risks calculated under the true distribution and the importance-reweighted truncated distribution. 22 Table 3: Comparison of NormSPORCTest and optimal decision boundary across different datasets 

Data RA RB RC Opt Boundary 

DO 8.4% 12% 11% x = ¯ x2

DT 12.2% 9.2 % 15.8% Not Intersect 

DIR 8.4% 12.2% 11.2% x = ¯ x2    

> (a) Histograms (b) SPO-RC+ Model on DO(c) SPO-RC+ Model on DIR

Figure 4: Visualization of the truncation toy example 

Lemma B.3 (Lemma 4 from Huang et al. (2006)) . Suppose we have knowledge of β(x) ∈ [0 , B ]

and let δ > 0. With probability at least 1 − δ over n i.i.d. samples from the true distribution D, and their corresponding truncations drawn from the truncated distribution ˜D, we have for all f ∈ F :

| ˆRn 

> D

(f ) − ˆRnβ ˜D (f )| ≤ (1 + p2 log(2 /δ ))Ω S (C)

r B2 + 1 

n ,

where β ˜D represents the truncated distribution adjusted for the importance weight β. Using Lemma B.3, we can replace ˆRn 

> D

(f ) in the generalization bound (7) with ˆRnβ ˜D (f ), thus ensuring that our generalization analysis remains valid when using importance-reweighted truncated data. 

Proposition B.4. Suppose we have knowledge of β(x) ∈ [0 , B ], let F be a hypothesis class, and let 

δ > 0. The following inequality holds with probability at least 1 − δ over an i.i.d. dataset Dn, and its corresponding truncated dataset ˜Dn, for all f ∈ F :

RD (f ) ≤ ˆRnβ ˜D (f ) + 2 Rn

> cost

(F) + Ω S (C)

r log(1 /δ )2n + (1 + p2 log(2 /δ )) 

r B2 + 1 

n

!

.

# C Additional experimental details and results 

In this section, we provide additional details on the numerical experiments presented in Section 4 and some additional results. The experiments were conducted on a MacBook Pro equipped with an Intel chip and 16 GB of RAM. 

C.1 Additional details and results on toy examples 

This section provides a more detailed explanation and additional toy examples supplementing the toy example presented in Section 4. To illustrate the effectiveness of importance reweighting and truncation, we consider a simplified version of the fractional knapsack problem. Specifically, we consider a case where our goal is to predict which of two items has a higher value based on a uniformly distributed context x ∈ [−1, 1] . The true relationships between the item values c1 and c2

and the context x are given by: 

c1 = −4x2 + 4 + ζ1, c 2 = 18 (x + 1) 2 + 2 .75 + ζ2,

23 where ζ1 and ζ2 are i.i.d. normal random variables with mean 0 and standard deviation 0.1. We generate 1,000 samples of (x, c 1, c 2). Figure 1a shows the scatter plot of these samples along with their true conditional expectations E[c1|x] and E[c2|x]. The curves intersect at two points, denoted 

¯x1 and ¯x2, partitioning the interval [−1, 1] into three distinct regions: A = [ −1, ¯x1], B = [¯ x1, ¯x2],and C = [¯ x2, 1] . Our goal is to use linear regression to predict c1 and c2 and make a decision based on which predicted value is higher. This is a special case of the fractional knapsack problem where the uncertain weight constraint is replaced with w1 + w2 = 1 without any uncertainty. 

C.1.1 Importance reweighting example 

In regions A and C, we observe that c2 < c 1, whereas in region B, c1 < c 2. Since the optimal decision changes across these regions and linear models may not capture the non-linear relationships perfectly, the decision made by the models will be incorrect in at least one of these regions. For instance, Figure 1c shows the learned decision boundary (red vertical line) of a linear model, which incorrectly predicts item 1 in region A, even though the true optimal choice is item 2. Notably, the optimal decision boundary (green vertical line in Figure 1c) makes incorrect decisions only in region 

A, where the difference between the two true curves is minimal. In fact, the area between the curves can be quantified using the NormSPORCTest metric on samples from each region, denoted as RA,

RB , and RC , corresponding to regions A, B, and C, respectively. Suppose we randomly remove 30% of the data where |x| < 0.5, reducing samples in region B. This shifts the smallest region from A to B (as shown in Table 3) thereby changing the optimal decision boundary. However, by applying importance reweighting, we correct for this and realign the decision boundary with the true distribution, as shown in Table 3. Figure 1b and 1c illustrate the learned SPO-RC+ models on DT and DIR . Notice that the learned decision boundary of SPO-RC+ on DIR ,the model with importance reweighting, is much closer to the true one than the model without it (SPO-RC+ on DT). Additionally, the NormSPORCTest measured with 500 test samples was lower in SPO-RC+ on DIR , indicating better performance. 

C.1.2 Truncation example 

In this example, we compare SPO-RC+ on DO with SPO-RC+ on DIR , to show the effectiveness of truncation. Building on the setting of the previous toy example, we introduce an additional capacity constraint w2 ≤ a2, where a2 equals 100 if x < 0.8 and a2 equals 0 otherwise. This makes the decision (w1, w 2) = (0 , 1) infeasible when x > 0.8. We use a linear regression model to predict a2

and construct the uncertainty set ˆU using conformal prediction with α = 0 .25 . In the region where 

x < 0.8, we set a2 large so that the constructed uncertainty set ˆU is large enough to include the original feasibility set defined by w1 + w2 = 1 , for all x ∈ [−1, 1] . Thus, this example is equivalent to the previous one, except that the induced optimal solution can now be infeasible when x > 0.8.Figure 4a shows the histograms of each dataset, indicating that all samples in region C (including the possible infeasible range [0 .8, 1] ) are truncated. This means that for x in the region C, a2 /∈ ˆU. Figures 4b and 4c show the learned linear models from SPO-RC+ on DO and DIR , respectively. The decision boundary learned from DIR closely matches the true optimal boundary, whereas the model trained on 

DO produces a less accurate solution. Evaluated on a dataset sampled from the feasibility-guaranteed region ( x < 0.5), SPO-RC+ on DO performs poorly, achieving a NormSPORCTest of 16.7%. In contrast, SPO-RC+ on DIR performs almost perfectly, with a NormSPORCTest value of 0.2%. Furthermore, in the region x > 0.8, the induced solution of SPO-RC+ on DO is (w∗ 

> 1

, w ∗ 

> 2

) = (1 , 0) ,which is infeasible. These results highlight the effectiveness of truncation when model complexity is limited and suggest focusing our learning capacity on the feasibility-guaranteed region. 

C.2 Additional details on the fractional knapsack instances Data generation process: We consider a fractional knapsack problem with d = 5 items and p = 10 

features. We adapt a popular data generation process in the literature, starting with Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022). We sample each element of the context vector x ∈ Rp from the uniform distribution Uniform (−1, 1) , and generate the cost vector c as: 

cij = 53.5deg c

" (Bcxi)j

√p + 3 

deg c

+ 10 

#

+ ϵcij ,

24 where i = 1 , . . . , n indexes the instances, j = 1 , . . . , d indexes the items, and ϵcij ∼ N (0 , 1) . The matrix Bc ∈ 0, 1d×p has elements sampled from a binomial distribution with probability 0.5. The parameter deg c is a fixed integer that determines the complexity of the cost function. Similarly, the weight vector a is generated as: 

aij = 53.5deg a

 (Baxi)j

√p + 3 

deg a

+ (p − ∥ xi∥1)ϵaij 

p ,

where Ba and ϵaij are generated in the same manner as Bc and ϵcij , respectively. Notice that the noise in aij increases with ∥xi∥1. We fix deg a = 4 for the weight function, while varying deg c = 2 , 4, 6, 8

to increase the complexity of the cost function, with b = 20 .

Model description for ℓ2-norm conformal prediction score: When the ℓ2-norm score is used for conformal prediction, the resulting robust reformulation takes the form of an SOCP: 

max 

> w∈Rd

c⊤w s.t. Q1−α∥w∥2 ≤ b − ˆa⊤w, 1⊤ 

> d

w = 1 , w ∈ [0 , 1] d.

To predict the weight vector ˆa, we use a one-layer neural network with ReLU activation functions. We set α = 0 .2 to compute the conformal prediction quantile. For the cost vector ˆc, we evaluate three models: Linear Regression (MSE), Random Forest (RF), and SPO-RC+ using a linear model. All models are trained using the Adam optimizer. The learning rate is set to 1 × 10 −3 for the MSE and RF models, and 4 × 10 −3 for the SPO-RC+ model. Training is conducted for 50 epochs with early stopping based on validation loss to prevent overfitting. 

Model description for ℓ1-norm conformal prediction score: When the ℓ1-norm score is used for conformal prediction, the resulting robust reformulation can be formulated as an LP: 

max 

> w∈Rd

c⊤w s.t. Q1−α∥w∥∞ ≤ b − ˆa⊤w, 1⊤ 

> d

w = 1 , w ∈ [0 , 1] d.

To predict the weight vector ˆa, we use a one-layer neural network with ReLU activation functions, and use α = 0 .2 to compute the conformal prediction quantile. For the cost vector ˆc, we evaluate both Linear Regression (MSE) and SPO-RC+ using a linear model. For the SPO-RC+ model, we warm start our method with MSE for faster training. All models are trained using the Adam optimizer. The learning rate is set to 1 × 10 −2 for the MSE and RF models, and 5 × 10 −2 for the SPO-RC+ model. Training is conducted for 50 epochs with early stopping based on validation loss to prevent overfitting. 

C.3 Additional details on the alloy production instances Data generation process: For the brass production scenario, we sample each element of the context vector and the cost vectors c using the same strategy used for the fractional knapsack problem. For each ore, we generate the concentration according to a Gamma distribution 

G·i = max {Gamma (P·i) + ϵk, 0} for each supplier i = 1 , . . . , d 

where P ∈ Rm×d is a base preference matrix independently sampled using a uniform distribution [0.1,1]. Since brass production requires around 30% of Zinc and 70% Copper to produce the alloy, we set the requirements to h = [2.9, 7.1]. 

Model description: When the ℓ2-norm score is used for conformal prediction, the resulting robust reformulation can be formulated as an SOCP: 

min 

> w∈Rd

c⊤w s.t. Q1−α∥w∥2 ≤ ˆa⊤ 

> j

w − hj ∀j = 1 , · · · , m, w ≥ 0,

To predict the weight vector ˆa, we use a one-layer neural network with ReLU activation functions. The conformal prediction quantile is computed using α = 0 .2. For the cost vector ˆc, we evaluate two models: Linear Regression (MSE), and SPO-RC+, again using a linear model class and with the MSE solution as a warm start. All models are trained using the Adam optimizer. The learning 25 Table 4: Percentage of infeasible solutions of alloy production instances for different methods on a test set (size 3000), with deg c = 8 .

Models PTO MSE ( DIR ) SPO-RC+ ( DIR )Infeasibility (%) 30.894 0.194 0.188 rate is set to 1 × 10 −2 for MSE and 4 × 10 −2 for SPO-RC+. Training is run for 50 epochs with an adaptive learning rate scheduler and early stopping based on validation loss to prevent overfitting. Table 4 shows that all methods that solve the robustly constrained problem yield almost no infeasible solutions, while almost 30% of the solutions from the PTO approach are infeasible. 26